The following is a conversation with
Rick Beato, legendary music educator,
interviewer, producer, songwriter, and a
true multi-instrument musician playing
guitar, bass, cello, and piano.
Rick, with his incredible YouTube
channel, celebrates great musicians and
musical ideas and helps millions of
people, including me, fall in love with
great music all over again.
This is the Lex Fridman podcast. To
support it, please check out our
sponsors in the description, where you
can also find links to contact me, ask
questions, give feedback, and so on.
And now, dear friends, here's Rick
Beato.
You had, I think, an incredibly fun and
diverse beginning to your music journey.
I heard somewhere that one of the things
that made you fall in love with music
was listening to guitar solos, some epic
guitar solos.
What's an early guitar solo that that
you remember? You connected to
spiritually,
musically, where you're like, "Wow,
there's magic in this." Well, the first
solo that I learned was "Hey Joe." It
was actually a good beginner song, you
know, when I first started playing the
guitar,
because it has pretty simple chords,
right? So, it's like E, C, G, D, A.
And I learned the solo, and I figured
out this like it's this pentatonic
scale, E minor pentatonic scale. They'll
do I didn't know that's what it was
called, but learned this thing and it's
like
whoa, he's just in this one shape here.
Now, there was no
you couldn't go look anything up. You
just if you could figure out the notes,
you noticed that there was a little
pattern to it.
And then I
I got so obsessed with it, and I showed
my younger brother John, who started
playing guitar right at the same time I
did. So, I was 14, he was 11.
And I would play rhythm for him for 5
minutes while he would solo over "Hey
Joe." And then as soon as I'd start
soloing, he'd throw the guitar down,
then we'd get in a fight.
And so, my mom eventually was like,
"What is going on here?" And I was like,
"John won't
play rhythm."
>> [laughter]
>> "John won't play rhythm for me." She's
like, "Okay, I'll play rhythm for you.
What What are the chords?"
And I was like, "Okay, it's like E, C,
G, D, A." And so, my mom would literally
play rhythm for 20 minutes while I'd
play.
>> #parenting That's amazing. [laughter]
I When I When I look back on it now, my
mom's been gone for 10 years now. When I
look back on it, it's like my god, my
parents were so cool. You should mention
that "Hey Joe" and Hendrix in general is
kind of known for the rhythm not being
simple rhythm, just the chords that you
mentioned. It's what you do with those
chords. It's almost improvisation on the
rhythm side.
>> He did all these really cool chord
fragments, riffs, and things like that.
That's just part of his That's the
Hendrix style. What do you think? I
mean, many people put Hendrix as the
greatest guitarists of all time. What do
you think is part of that?
>> You know, I I make lists. You do. If you
somehow don't know who Rick Beato is, go
on YouTube right now and watch your
excellent interviews with musicians,
watch your breakdown analysis of
different songs,
and watch your top 20 lists, where
you're very opinionated, sometimes very
openly critical about certain kinds of
songs. It's fun. Opinions are fun.
>> [laughter]
>> But they do change, Lex, from day to
day.
But anytime I I do a list, if I do 20, I
like to do 20 because that gives me some
leeway to to throw in I have to throw in
something that is so weird that people,
you know, so something that a lot of
people won't know, just to have it on
there so I can at least introduce a you
know, I'll put somebody like a Allan
Holdsworth, who's a famous fusion guitar
player.
I'll throw in one of his solos or
something, just some some oddball solo
in there, just so that people as they're
listening down the list will get exposed
to something they would not necessarily
get exposed to. Yeah, a lot of variety,
but Hendrix
Did you show up here today, Rick,
>> [laughter]
>> trying to tell me that Hendrix is not up
there? I just I'm getting that vibe
right now.
>> No, I'm not I but I don't want to to say
greatest, you know,
you you can say, "Well,
there there are people that that
inspired Jimi Hendrix,
Charlie Christian, older guitar players.
Charlie Christian and Django Reinhardt
were the first two really big and
probably and Andrés Segovia were were
three of the giants of the 20th century
as far as guitar influences for most of
the players that were to follow. So,
here going to perplexity, Django
Reinhardt was, of course, a jazz
guitarist and composer active mainly in
France and is widely regarded as one of
the greatest guitarists in jazz history.
So, Django was um
well, there's a huge movement right now,
gypsy jazz movement, as they call it,
that is um kind of built around the
style of music that he played back in
the early 20th century. One of the
things about Django is that he was in a
fire,
and he had two of his
third and fourth fingers, so his his
ring finger and pinky were essentially
melted together. He had no use of them.
Although, he could use them while he was
chording, but a lot of these incredibly
fast lines, he's just playing with two
fingers.
And
it's amazing.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That
>> [laughter]
>> What is that? So, that's gypsy jazz.
>> That's gypsy jazz, yeah.
Him, Stéphane Grappelli, who's a
violinist that played with him a lot.
How much of this is improvisation?
Everything he's doing there is
improvised.
>> [music]
>> Feels so free. Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> And fun, like swing. And then that leads
to you said pre-bop. So, bebop was a
kind of jazz that was also influential
on you
and your own life journey, and it's this
complicated, legendary kind of jazz that
was very influential on the music that
followed. So, what what was bebop?
>> Well, after the the big bands
were happening in the you know, from the
'20s through the '40s,
small
people would go out and play in small
groups that they would tour with. And
Charlie Parker, who's really kind of the
one of the main figures of early bebop,
really developed the language of it.
Usually, the music that they're playing
over are standard chord progressions
that that they would use as vehicles to
improvise over. A lot of them were AABA
form.
And Charlie Parker
created this
language of improvisation that was far
more sophisticated than the swing
players
of the big band era. You know, you think
of people like Benny Goodman
of that era. They would have really fast
tempo songs, angular lines,
chromaticism, things like that,
chromatic notes. Chromatic notes are
just notes next to each other on the
fretboard.
>> I like to think of it as connecting
notes.
>> Connecting. You're putting in more notes
than are supposed to be there and so on,
doing creating some interesting texture.
Yeah, so that is one of the most
difficult styles to master. Cuz all
these things are a language. Yeah, blues
playing, they're all just languages,
right? It's like just like you'd learn
any type of language.
>> [snorts]
>> Um my dad loved bebop. Now, when I was a
little kid and he's listening to these
bebop records, whether it's Charlie
Parker Dizzy Gillespie,
Oscar Peterson, Joe Pass, great jazz
guitar player. I'm just hearing this
stuff. I don't know any different. My
dad was not a musician, but for some
reason, he liked incredibly
sophisticated
music that was very technical and um
I just heard it and just was like, "Oh,
yeah, okay, cool." And not realizing
that
it was developing my ear, because I
really bebop is one of the hardest
to improvise in that style, in that
language of bebop. It's very difficult
to do. And
hearing it as a kid is one of the things
that I think enables you, just like
languages,
enables you to learn it
as opposed to somebody that's never been
exposed to it and tries to learn it as a
teenager. It's I think it's very similar
to learning languages,
which kind of is like my theory on
perfect pitch, that every child is born
with perfect pitch, and they start to
lose the ability around 9 months
when people become
culturally bound listeners, when babies
do.
They start out as citizens of the world,
you know, they can they have the phone
the the
neural pathways to hear the sounds, the
phonemes of all 6,500 languages spoken
on Earth.
But then around 9 months, they begin to
lose that ability, and they
when they become these culturally bound
listeners. There's a great YouTube video
with this woman, Patricia Kuhl. She's a
language researcher.
And I watched this, "The Linguistic
Genius of Babies." I saw this in 2010,
this lecture that she did, like a TED
Talk. And she talks about this that kids
they did a an experiment. They exposed
kids to Mandarin three times a week for
25 minute sessions, just a
person speaking Mandarin to these
babies, and they were able to recognize
the sounds the phonemes of that language
even later on.
And
when I realized that my son Dylan had
perfect pitch,
I thought why does Dylan have perfect
pitch but no one
in my family had ever had perfect pitch
and I thought well it must be because of
the things I exposed to him
prenatally and then in the first 9
months of his life because it's the only
way I could explain it. We're going to
return to Joe Pass. We got to go to
Dylan. You mentioned Dylan. I guess it's
in part one of the origin stories of
uh you putting out videos into the world
is the early videos you did with Dylan
set of videos on his perfect pitch and
for people don't know and maybe you can
speak to what perfect pitch means. It's
the ability to identify any note
without a reference tone. So um
you can play
it doesn't matter how quickly they are
that they can a person with perfect
pitch can hear a note and immediately
identify it or collection of notes. And
taking a tangent upon a tangent, you
also have a course on ear training. Yes,
but my course is for relative pitch not
to be confused with perfect pitch. Is it
fair to say that relative pitch as far
as the thing you would learn is more
useful for musicians? Yes. Can you
explain the difference between the two?
Relative pitch is basically
learning how to identify pitches
relative to a
stated tonic or something that you've
heard or just relative to each other.
If you hear a note and then you hear
another note after it,
you can recognize let's say it's a minor
third interval. So if you're on the note
A, the next note would be C. Mhm. So
once you're given a reference note,
you can use relative pitch to to
identify the relative nature from one
pitch to another. And of course
intervals make up scales and intervals
make up chords. Yep. And so that if you
develop it tangibly,
uh
relative pitch, you can understand you
can hear the music better. Yes.
So what what does it take uh since we're
taking a tangent on a tangent, what's uh
what does it take to train your ear?
What's uh
a TLDR on the course before people go
out and sign up? It's just practice
basically. You start with intervals.
Typically with small intervals like
minor second, major second. So a minor
second would be half step, major second
would be whole step. Are you listening
to the tone one after the other or two
of them together? Both. So played
separately it's called melodic
intervals, right? Like a melody. Mhm.
And harmonic intervals are played like a
harmony together.
So you have to be able to identify them
both both ways. What's an early journey
like? We'll give people a preview of
what they should like what does that
look like? What does what does practice
look like? Well, my course it will play
you an interval and then you identify it
by clicking on whether it's
you know, a major third or minor third
or major sixth or minor sixth or perfect
fifth tritone, whatever it is and and it
will teach you gradually over time how
to recognize
all the intervals. So you listen to a
melodic interval or harmonic interval,
how
quickly does the ear in the various age
groups that we humans are in,
how quickly does the ear learn
the different intervals? Is it uh a
week, two weeks, a month, two months,
five years? I think you get pretty
quickly within you know, if you practice
within a couple months you can you can
really make um a lot of progress on it
if you practice daily. What benefit does
it have to uh to you as a musician in
general? Well, it's great if you want to
hear a chord progression if you're
trying to figure out a song
and you can say oh that's going from the
six minor chord to the four major to the
five major to the one major
and you can just identify it immediately
and then you figure out what the first
chord is then you know what the rest of
the chords are cuz they're
in relation to whatever that first chord
is and for learning solos for example or
learning melodies, being able to sound
something out. Now do you recommend
people couple that with uh music theory
uh in ter- in terms of education the the
education journey? They have to be
taught together because
these terms are really music theory,
right?
>> Mhm. And the those intervals major
second, minor second, major third, minor
third, perfect fourth.
So as you're doing that and then
you once you learn the intervals,
the 12 intervals in an octave, then you
you learn them both melodically and
harmonically so played together and
separate, then you learn chords and so
then you learn to identify major, minor,
diminished, augmented, suspended chords,
things like that. Well, you're basically
learning music theory at the same time
with that cuz learning music theory is
just the name of things in music. So
there's the sound of things, Mhm.
there's [clears throat] the name of
things and then there's the haptic like
playing the thing Right. Probably. So
playing chords, playing scales. You have
I believe a course on scales and on
chords.
>> Yeah. Okay, since we're doing the
tangent, let's go. How do you recommend
people There's a bunch of people
listening to this that are curious about
uh
how they can start in playing guitar,
maybe even playing piano and maybe
playing other instruments.
Although guitar of course is the
greatest instrument of all time. What
are the early steps of that journey?
What what do you recommend people do in
general? Well, if you're a beginner,
uh
getting a good beginner guitar course
and learning first of all the open
chords in first position.
Uh a lot of songs can be played that
way. A lot of old songs can be played
that way. Maybe not new modern songs
necessarily. So learning a few chords
and
with an eye towards maybe playing a
song?
>> Yeah. With an eye towards you learn you
learn the chord shapes and you learn how
to strum basic patterns to begin with.
I think the first thing for learning
guitar is actually how to position your
fingers so that you you don't mute
strings that you don't want to mute.
Yeah. That's the hardest thing for
people to do basically is to get their
fingers arched to where they if you're
playing a C major chord, your index
finger's on the first fret of the B
string and you have to have that open E
string ringing there and it's hard for
people to make those micro micro
adjustments. You take it for granted
like you've been playing guitar for
I don't know how many years, forever,
right?
>> Forever, yeah. And you don't even think
about stuff like that when you're
playing a guitar solo. Every little
thing that you do if you're playing your
Comfortably Numb guitar solo,
you have to out of midair strike the
string that your finger's on to play the
note and these are all fine adjustments
that you're doing. I'm I'm just a
hobbyist recreational player but it if
wow, you're taking me all the way back.
You're right. It's the haptic, the
physical aspect of it is really tricky.
Comfortably Numb is a good example. But
if you do lead, you have to get a super
clean sound. Now that's both when you're
playing fast, you you want it to be
super precise,
but when you play slow, when you have
one note and you're holding it and
you're bending it, it better be really
clean. Yes. And for that it's I guess
you have to really place the finger in
the right place plus there's the well,
there's the calluses
so it doesn't hurt.
>> [laughter]
>> And then the positioning of the string
on the curvature of of the finger, where
does it fall? Like how much do you bend
the finger?
>> to have enough of flesh on it to
actually raise the
raise the string in pitch. Yep.
Otherwise it Yeah, cuz you're lifting it
with part of a flesh. And of course you
have to decide depends how OCD you are.
Do you want to be like the perfect the
proper musician or do you want to do a
Hendrix?
Uh so the thumb over the top. Way over
the top, yes. And so like you if you
have a fretboard here, I think the more
like classical guitarists, the very
proper perfect uh perpendicular
alignment of the the fingertips to the
fretboard versus like Hendrix is like
fuck it.
>> [laughter]
>> You nerds.
I'm going to do it. With the messiness
is part of the magic. Of course like
B.B. King is also kind of messy looking
in terms of his positioning of the
fingers,
but his tone is incredibly clean. Yes,
super clean.
>> So like that teaches you that maybe any
position can converge towards a super
clean tone. You just have to figure it
out. I think a lot of it has to do with
how they wear their guitars. If you wear
your guitar low, if you're Hendrix and
you're wearing your guitar That's true.
If you're wearing it lower lower, then
you you can't get your fingers
on top of it like that and the thumb
acts as as a way to mute the lower
strings from ringing if you're playing
through a loud amplifier. So there's so
many other micro adjustments when you're
playing leads cuz you have to kind of
mute the other strings that are so they
don't ring out. Mhm. If you're play-
playing the first note in Comfortably
Numb in the solo at the end and you're
at the ninth fret of the G string and
you bend that, Mhm.
>> [clears throat]
>> if you bend that G string and you
accidentally hit the B string under it,
>> Mhm. you don't want that ringing. So you
have to kind of angle your fin- index
finger so it to mute to mute that. Yeah.
>> these micro adjustments that you don't
even think about, I mean you're not
thinking about that like when you're
playing it. You've done it so many times
that these things are just part of your
of your brain. That's why this is such a
great brain developer for kids to learn
instruments. Yeah, of course you have to
solve that puzzle.
Must be really frustrating in the
beginning. Like holding a chord. Yes.
Like all of them.
And hurts too, right? If you're doing
acoustic guitar.
>> Not for that long though. For like
a week. yeah. Couple weeks. Couple
>> [laughter]
>> I don't want to discourage anyone, you
know, it's it's actually pretty easy to
learn basic stuff. Right, but the
the pain is temporary, I guess is the
point I'm trying to make. It is.
Uh so so what else? So the physical
component, play a few chords, where does
the journey continue if you're learning
guitar? Well, then it's like if you play
electric guitar,
then you get into single note playing
and stuff like that. That's where it
gets, to me, where it gets really fun.
You know, you have single note playing
that with riffs, if you think of Back in
Black, right? That has a a riff embedded
in the in the actual melody.
Or many songs that have riffs, the
Hendrix stuff that has chordal riffs,
and you're moving up the neck and
and uh involving all the fingers and
things like that. So there's it really
depends on what you want to what styles
you want to play. So you're thinking
about song learning, so different
components of song learning, so riffs in
songs, lead in songs. And then you have
finger picking, if you have Stairway to
Heaven, songs like that. How about
wanting to learn that? That involves
finger picking because the you have to
isolate certain notes of the chord and
play two at together, you know, and
multiple times. There's a few crossroads
you have to get to select things.
Uh so I guess you're speaking to the
fact there's a if you're righty, there's
a right hand you can use your fingers or
you can use a pick. Correct.
>> And that's the choice you make. And
sometimes you use both. Cuz in Stairway
to Heaven, you're using the fingers at
the beginning
or fingers and pick,
hybrid, they call it hybrid picking, and
then later on you're using the pick to
flat pick the picking patterns. On the
music theory front, do you recommend
people learn scales and chords and like
the theory of it? Uh later on, I would
say. I wouldn't say necessarily right
right off the bat. Mhm.
I think I think learning songs is the is
the first thing that you should do cuz
it you want to keep people motivated. So
you get them to like fall in love with
music and playing.
All right. And that takes a couple
months, 3 months? Depends on how
motivated they are.
So you recommend practicing what, every
day?
>> Every day. My son, Dylan, when he
started learning guitar
a couple years ago,
I said,
"It's better to practice
10 minutes a day, 7 days a week, than to
practice 1 day for an hour, which is
roughly the same amount of time." Yeah.
But it usually turns into something
longer. But otherwise, like if you're
busy life,
you know, taking a day off, that day
turns into a week, and then a week turns
into a month, and all of a sudden you
haven't touched the instrument for
months.
Which is why I leave my guitar on a
stand all the time. So that if I walk by
it, I'm like, "Okay, I'll just pick it
up for a second." And then that second
turns into 10 minutes and an hour, 2
hours. All right, we got to talk about
this Dylan video. So this might be one
of the earliest
>> That's the first one.
>> That's the first video on the channel.
>> Well, it was it was actually before the
channel cuz this actually blew up on
Facebook, and then I put it on YouTube
after.
Uh so if it's okay, Yeah. Okay, Dylan,
we're going to do the hardest ear
training test of all time. Are you
ready?
Ready.
>> [laughter]
>> Now, I I just a quick backstory on this.
I made this for my friend Shane's wife
who wanted to see cuz Shane I was a a
uh friend that I was producing,
and he was there, and Dylan had come
down the day in the day, and I said,
"Oh, check this out." And I played this
stuff. He's like, "That's amazing. Can
you make a video so I can show my wife?"
And I was on the way to a school board
meeting cuz I was on the school board at
Dylan's school,
and I said, "Hey, Dylan, come
downstairs. I want to make this video.
It'll take 1 minute. Just need to do
this thing for my friend Shane."
And he's like, "I don't want to." And I
said, "Come on, it's it'll take 1
minute." "I don't want to." So I said to
my wife, I'm like, "Neena,
would you tell Dylan to come downstairs?
I want to do this video. It'll take 1
minute."
She's like, "It
Dylan, go downstairs." And he had a he
has a mouthful of candy there cuz he was
eating candy. So if you look at him,
he's he's
he's literally has a mouthful of candy
while he's doing this. And what you're
saying Facebook, uh it went quite viral.
Yeah, like it
I don't know, 80 million views,
something like that. It had like 250,000
comments, something like that. Insane.
How old is Dylan here?
>> He's eight. 8 years old.
>> Yeah. Can you actually give some more
backstory about like how you discovered
that Dylan has perfect pitch? So when
Dylan was about two,
he
I was doing a FaceTime with my brother
John, and and I was I was like, "Check
this out, John." And I played the Stone
in Love, Neil Schon's solo from Journey,
and and I was like, "Check this out."
And Dylan would sing along, and
and my son my brother John was like,
"Wow, Dylan can sing all the notes." And
I was like, "Yeah." And then I played
Black Dog, Zeppelin, and Dylan would
sing that, and
I was like, "Dylan's got a good ear."
And then John and I were like, "Well, we
have good ears, too. So
maybe we could have done that when we
were that age." So a couple of more
years goes by. Well, he was about 3 and
1/2, and I'm in the car, I'm like,
"Dylan, sing the Star Wars theme." And
he sings it, and I'm like,
"That's in the right key."
And I checked. I played it on my phone.
I was like, "Oh my gosh." And then I
asked him, "Play sing the Superman
theme." cuz we'd been listening to John
Williams
soundtracks the week before. And he
sings that, and that was in the right
key. And I asked him another song. So I
turn the car around, I go back to the
studio. I go to the piano, hit the note
B flat, and Dylan says,
"Star Wars."
Star Wars starts on a big B flat major
chord, but it's the note B flat is the
main one that you hear.
And then I played the note G, and he
goes, "Superman." And that's the first
note in the trumpet part of the of the
Superman theme. And then I realized that
he had perfect pitch, and then in 5
minutes I taught him the name of the 12
notes. Mhm. Which he already knew, but
he just didn't know the names. Oh, so he
just associated the names to the thing
he know. What do you think is this in
his mind? Cuz it's not just individual
notes. He can like hear everything.
>> Yeah. What is that?
>> He doesn't see colors. He just says
every note sounds completely different.
Wow.
Like you said, maybe it's a language
thing.
>> Yeah.
Is there really is a
he just learned the language.
>> Yeah, the language. It's like it's like
perfect um
it's like native music fluency, if you
think of it like that. So let's let's
listen to some of this. Turn around.
Here we go. As fast as you can. We're
going to start with single notes, then
we're going to do some intervals, then
chords. Okay, here we go.
A.
C sharp.
B flat.
C.
E.
>> [music]
>> A flat. Okay, good. Two notes at once.
Here we go.
C flat. Great. How about this?
E flat A. Great. What about [music]
this?
E flat A flat. This is incredible.
C B flat. And then how about this?
>> [music]
>> E flat.
What is it? E E flat. Correct.
>> [laughter]
>> He's he's annoyed.
He is annoyed.
>> Yeah. This but the part of this when I
play these next chords, that's really I
think why the video went so viral, the
next part of this where I play these
super complex poly chords. Okay, I'm
going to do some poly chords for you.
These are really going to be hard. You
ready? What's this?
>> [music]
>> C augmented over D flat augmented. Okay,
sing a B flat.
Very good. What's this chord?
>> [music]
[music]
>> E
flat over A flat major over A major.
Great. Sing an F sharp.
Excellent.
What's this chord?
>> [music]
>> A minor over D
flat major. Great. What's this chord?
>> [music]
>> E add nine over F major.
He had nine over F major. So I had to
look at my hand to make sure that that's
what it was cuz they're all in
inversions.
So I think the reason that this went so
viral is that the more that someone knew
about music, the more that they shared
the video because these poly chords so
the
people that were the best musicians were
were would looked at it and was like,
"Oh my god, you know, it's C augmented
over D flat augmented."
Um
and the second chord was A flat major
over A major, but they're both in
inversion, right? So it was like a a
first inversion A flat major chord,
first inversion A major chord.
And then A minor over D flat major, and
then E add nine over F major. And for an
8-year I mean, for anyone, plus they're
all close voiced. They're all just right
next to each other. It's not like, you
know, where you can hear them clear.
It's all in the mid-range of the piano.
So you have to really listen and and you
have to di- he has to dissect each one.
Like what are the notes being played
there? And and what is like what's the
theory? Cuz he's actually using music
theory to dissect them. It must be in
his brain
those components of the chords all sound
different, like very clearly different.
>> Yes.
It's truly incredible. The human mind is
incredible. And so you're you're saying
like some part of that
is the things you hear in the first few
months of life. I did a thing where I I
played what I call high information
music. High information music would be
Bach, Well-Tempered Clavier,
fugues,
you an- anything Bach.
And I would play the Well-Tempered
Clavier, and I would play I have a
uh friend who Turkish pianist who's one
of the greatest improvisers I've ever
heard. His name is Aydın Esen.
And I would play Aydın's improvisations
for Dylan. It had very sophisticated
harmony and linear things in it.
And Keith Jarrett and um
mainly jazz
classical and modern classical music.
And then then we would play listen to
rock music once he was born. I'm talking
on my wife's stomach before Dylan was
born starting at 15 weeks for 30 minutes
a night.
And then when Dylan was born, I would
sit with him for an hour every morning
and listen to music and I would look at
him. In order for this
for them to
hear these phonemes apparently and
develop this language or get the the
language as acquisition has to involve
the social brain. So when kids look at
you you're when a baby's looking at you
they're looking at your mouth and you're
getting social cues from
from that. And this is also another
component of
saying
this is where this word stops or starts
and stops. These are how this the
phonemes are separated from one another.
These are how they're connected. So I
believe that all kids are born with
perfect pitch and then around 9 months
they begin to lose it. If you don't
engage their social brain making these
pitches know I never played pitches for
Dylan I said this is a C this is a B
flat this is a G. I just played complex
high information music for him and and
played with him. And then applies maybe
even more generally to high information
language. Yes.
And it starts before they're born. I
think I I saw some
some of the these incredible scientists
that work
on the neuroscience and neurobiology
psychology of language in early life.
I think a big part is in the mother's
stomach you're listening to the mother
speak.
>> Yes. That's right. So like that's that's
how on the language side you're picking
up the language already. That's right.
And you're picking up the music musical
language. So native music fluency you
could call it. So if the mother's
sitting back and listening to Bach and
some bebop jazz
you have a you have a pretty good
chance. Much better chance. [laughter]
Okay. All right. So that as we unwind
our way back Joe Pass and bebop you were
you were funny enough talking about what
is bebop jazz and and people like Joe
Pass and in your own life your dad was
somehow listening
to that kind of incredibly complex and
sophisticated music.
>> But wasn't a musician which is very
weird. I we never
my I have six siblings and we could
never figure out why dad liked really
sophisticated jazz. We just took it for
granted at that time.
>> Yeah, just took it for granted. And my
dad passed away in 2004 and we never
really talked about that but he and I
used to listen to music together all the
time. He'd put we'd put on a record I'd
sit on one side of the room he'd sit on
the other
and not say a word listen through the
whole side A I'd go flip it over
listen to side B never say a word
and then get up and go do stuff.
And we did that all the time.
And so the first time you impressed your
dad was with the Joe Pass song right?
And by the way we'll have to go to this
song cuz
people must have forgot cuz
>> [laughter]
>> people just think you're
like a good communicator or something.
They they don't realize how good you are
at guitar how good you are actually a
lot of instruments but guitar especially
and there's this video the greatest
guitar solo period.
>> [laughter]
>> Uh can you give me some context for this
particular intricate complicated solo?
Who's Joe Pass?
>> Joe Pass was a guitarist he lived from
1929 to 1994.
And he was one of the greatest bebop
players
and solo guitar player. So he made a
record that this is off of called
Virtuoso in 1973
that my dad gave me for Christmas when I
was in 10th grade. And he said and this
is not like my dad. My dad worked for
the railroad he was very
you know few words spoken born in 1919.
He said if you ever learn to play guitar
like this you've accomplished something
with your life.
And I was like what? So this let record
state was unopened until about March
after Christmas and then one day I was
like okay I'll open it up and I put it
on I start listening to it.
And
I was like woah this is kind of cool.
And so I said I think I can figure out
some of this stuff. So I figured out
this thing. Is it by by ear mostly?
>> by ear. I didn't know any of the chords
or anything. If you can listen to a
little bit here.
>> go back to that brother bro brother to
brother Gino Vannelli thing with Carlos
Rios playing that stuff is incredibly
hard. This I'm starting I don't know any
of these chords. So I start out
I don't even know what that chord is but
I figured it out I
I just and it's weird. I mean look at
that weird bar there. So you were just
finding um
like playing around with the putting
your fingers in the various positions.
Right but trying every combination of
fingers. I never played that chord. It's
a weird looking chord.
>> Yeah. And but I
kept I moved my fingers around till I
heard till where it sounded like oh
that's it definitely. And I was looking
at my hand I was like what is that? Had
no idea what it was. So you were
connected to the song. You were really
connected to the music.
>> Yeah.
And so that that's why you can hear it's
not necessarily did you even do you you
didn't have perfect pitch
and not even relative pitch. No I did
not.
>> Yeah. No I didn't know anything about
intervals. I didn't know anything about
music theory anything. This is all just
You were just like playing around with
different shapes that's amazing.
>> look at that weird bar there.
But then you get into these things
>> [music]
>> So that stuff there I could figure out.
>> And then this
That stuff I could figure out and then
these things here
those are just inversions of an
>> [music]
>> but I didn't know that.
I had heard Joe play that on the record.
This is the last song on there. I
listened to it a bunch of times and I
started So you just replay over and over
and over and over and you're like trying
to replicate it. Yes and I'm memorizing
every different chord shape. All chord
shapes that I had never played before.
Would you recommend people do something
like that on a really complicated song?
Yeah but there's so many YouTube videos
that you can go and just learn it
without having to
Yes I would recommend. I feel like the
struggle
>> The struggle is where it's at. This is
true for education in general. People
like there's all these educators that
try to make learning easier
and more fun and all that kind of stuff.
Great wonderful but part of the thing is
the struggle. Absolutely. But yeah let's
uh start hearing there's
>> [music]
>> you're nuts.
I heard licks like that all over this.
So I knew that that was
and then
>> [music]
>> these licks here
He plays a lot of ideas like that.
That's basically a C9 chord and the top
notes of it.
So all these are just inversions of of
the same chord. [music]
So if I can play that then it's just
figuring out the single notes. Okay? So
>> [music]
[music]
>> Okay so if you just take this first part
here when he goes
So this this intro part You make it
sound so simple when you break it down
and and and by the way Joe Pass
incredible guitar player like this is
obvious.
>> [music]
>> And he improvised all this.
>> played it like that. But you know the
first
>> [music]
>> was the individual notes. Ooh that's
hard.
>> [music]
>> Maybe he's playing like that.
That sounds more more realistic.
>> [music]
[music]
>> The amount of
the different genres that you're able to
replicate is just incredible. This is
just taking the needle moving it there
then going back a little bit oh there
and then by the end the record was so
scratched.
>> [laughter]
>> It was
um
but it was worth it. When I played it
for my dad
>> Mhm. he couldn't believe I mean he
didn't say that's amazing. He was just
like hmm pretty good. So what was the
role of bebop jazz in the history of
music? It seems like it was influential
on your life.
Uh another guy you had an incredible
interview with Flea. People should go
listen to that was a great conversation.
One of the things that surprised me is
just how many musical genres influenced
Flea.
And the guy showed up in a Miles Davis
t-shirt.
Bebop. And Miles Davis played with
Charlie Parker. Mhm. When he was 18
years old and that's he was Charlie
Parker was really his mentor. Can you
explain to me why with many of the folks
you've interviewed
uh
and in general out there
in the in the world of jazz all roads
lead to Miles Davis. Why he's such an
influential figure? Because he was the
greatest innovator in the history of
jazz.
He was at the forefront of all these
different styles of jazz. I mean he
started as a bebop player and then he
had records like the birth birth of cool
and modal jazz and hardbop and records
like Bitches Brew where he started to
I guess you would call fusion you start
to get these records.
You had two main groups of Miles Davis.
You had the Miles Davis 50s Quintet and
the Miles Davis 60s Quintet.
Now, Miles made records with many
people, but the 50s Quintet had John
Coltrane in it. Had I mean had different
piano players. Could be Wynton Kelly.
But Paul Chambers in the bass, Philly
Joe Jones in the drums. Um and that
particular group was uh made just
incredibly important records. And then
he had his 60s group, which was uh
Herbie Hancock on the piano, Ron Carter
on the bass, Tony Williams on the drums,
and Wayne Shorter on the saxophone.
And
they made all these incredibly important
records. I forget who said it uh in
interview with you, but they talked
about like
uh Miles Davis
um his music feeling like I think it I
think toes hanging over the cliff or
something like this. Meaning like
there's always a risk, there's a danger
that you're willing to make
to fuck it all up live.
And that feeling is what creates the the
aliveness of the music.
Like can you speak to that? Just the the
creating in the music the feeling like
you're on the edge.
Like you're challenging the
possibilities of what can happen and it
all can go to shit and because of that
it feels alive. Well, when I interviewed
Ron Carter that played in in Miles' 60s
Quintet
I asked Ron because Ron did records. He
played bass on
two 2,200 recording famous records. And
I said
did you guys ever rehearse with Miles?
No.
Never. I said so you what what would you
do? He goes we just show up in the
studio and he'd have the charts, put
them on the stand, and and we would
we just roll. Mhm. And I said would you
listen to it after? No.
>> [laughter]
>> And I said well what about your what
about the
the live records that you did at when
you'd record at clubs and things like
that? He goes we never knew that we were
recording. He goes maybe I'd see a a
microphone a different kind of
microphone in my bass amp. He goes then
months later the a record would come out
and I'd see and I was on it and I would
take it down to the union and say I
played on this record so you can get
paid for it. But he said we didn't even
know we were recording.
>> Yeah.
>> So, Miles was always about, you know,
don't think about it, just just play.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> That's crazy. That was on purpose. That
was not on purpose. Not to not to do the
rehearsals. Not none none of that.
>> Yeah, he wanted people to just
feel it,
play it.
Thought is the enemy of flow.
As Vinnie Colaiuta told me. Thought is
the enemy of flow.
How do you make sense that Flea, the
bassist for the Red Hot Chili Peppers,
is influenced by bebop jazz? So, his
stepfather was a jazz bass player. Mhm.
And his when his parents got divorced,
his he was born in Australia and then
they moved to to New York. Then his
parents got divorced and his mom married
his stepfather who was a jazz jazz
musicians. And they then they used to
have jam sessions at their place.
And Flea
loved it. It was kind of like my
upbringing with my dad playing jazz all
the time.
And when it Once it gets inside you,
it's just there. And uh and so he is
heavily influenced by jazz musicians.
>> Yeah, his impression was just hilarious.
I mean, he's a character. His whole
physical way of being is a character.
And his impression of just upright bass
is just fun to watch. His whole His
intensity when he picked up his bass
during the interview,
it he's an intense guy and funny and you
know, really uh um
emotional and um
And he picks up his bass and there's a
fierceness that you immediately feel.
And he starts he talks about how he
practices and then when he starts doing
slapping stuff, he gets
is so into it and and I'm just sitting
there going whoa.
Wow.
>> talked about his practicing routine with
you. And one of the things he's like I
have to practice the slapping.
>> Yeah. No, there's differences in the
structure of the different bands, but
usually like the the bassist has a vibe
to them. I don't know if we can put
words to exactly what that is. It's a
kind of energy
that drives the band. To me, the bass is
one of the only instruments that when
you play a bad note, everybody notices.
I started on the bass Mhm.
as a kid. Oh, interesting. Yeah.
>> But you also play drums. You also play
Yeah, but my first instrument was the
cello in third grade. And then I
switched to the bass in sixth grade. And
my I majored my undergrad degree was in
classical bass.
So, I
I always think of myself as a bass
player first.
And I always think the bass is the most
important instrument because
>> Strong words. because
>> [laughter]
>> as much as I love to play the guitar and
I love to play the guitar more than
anything I think, but the bass really
defines what the quality of the chord
is. Cuz you can put the root in there,
you can put the third of the chord in
the bass, you can put the fifth in
there. You can play a lot of notes. And
whatever you play in the bass kind of
defines what kind of chord it is. So,
the bass player has a lot of power.
I have to go back to our at the
beginning of our conversation. What what
do you think are some of the great solos
of all time?
Can we can we put a few in the
consideration? You have a great list on
top 20 rock guitar solos of all time.
Yeah, so I put Comfortably Numb as my
favorite as my top one.
>> Yeah, on that day, right?
>> On that day.
>> Yeah. Right. Now, the day later I would
have said it's the second solo.
>> [laughter]
>> Okay.
>> did the first solo because because
nobody talks about that solo. And that
solo is equally great. And when David
Gilmour
when I played it for him and we had
talked about it in my interview with
him, it was
just to watch his face when he listened
to it was incredible. I mean, I'm
thinking to myself it's like I'm sitting
with David Gilmour and he's listening to
Comfortably Numb and he's hearing it.
He's played it a million times live. But
how many times has he gone back and
listened to it on the record? Mhm.
>> It's probably not for a long time. And
then he's hearing it and he's like oh.
Maybe you just don't look back. When you
do great things, you don't look back.
>> Miles never looked back. He never wanted
to hear the old stuff. He always moved
on. There was this funny moment um where
you where you made a video why David
Gilmour will never be on the channel.
And then you ended up of course
interviewing him twice. He's one of the
greatest guitar players of all time.
What do you think is at the core of his
genius? He has just an incredible
melodic sense.
He knows
how phrases should be put together.
There's a flow to his ideas that I think
is just incredible. It's the same with
Hendrix. This flow how one idea leads to
the next, how there's space between
them. It's just like speaking. That's
why I read about
uh Miles Davis is is very good at
understanding tempo
and the value of silence.
>> Yes.
And I think
I think David Gilmour doesn't always
play fast.
Right.
>> But he does a lot with less. Yes. And
then uh some of that is also on the more
technical side probably. The tone of the
I mean, he's one of the most uniquely
recognizable tones in all of music.
>> Yes. What do you understand about what
it takes to shape the tone that is David
Gilmour?
>> He has a very sophisticated setup for
his tone. And and that was one of the
things when I went to his studio
and I said to him, so David, is there
anything I'm not supposed to see here? I
mean, he never sits down and shows
people his gear and he laughed about it.
Mhm. [clears throat] But there I am
sitting there right next to all these
pedals that and I and I asked his tech
Phil, I said did these the same ones he
used on the records? He's like yeah. And
his tech has been with him for like 50
years.
And
I mean, the exact ones? Yes. So, it's
just hard to
it's hard to imagine that
those things still of course though.
They he's just kept it. Yeah, this is
his been since echo that he played
through and this is this
you know, these are all the same effects
pedals and the wait, is this the same
Hiwatt amp? Yeah. Is this the same yes.
Yeah, you get some new stuff, but uh but
they
keep all their own gear and that's uh I
mean, he's did he did sell his guitars
for charity. But like he has a black
strat that is a it's a signature
version. It's the exact copy of his old
one.
>> Mhm. So, [clears throat]
to him it sounds exactly the same, plays
the same. Well, of course they converge
towards that kind of
hardware.
But there's so many tiny details over
the years.
You see the final result of it, but
there's a there's a journey there of of
exploring. And of course he's not I
guess he's not doing any soft like no
emulation, no amp
>> He does do emulation actually. He does
he has this thing and this is I asked
him in the first interview about this.
There's a little rack thing that I had
heard that he used, but I asked him for
sure. It's called the Zoom 9030. Mhm. I
put out a short where he talks about it.
I said so that that Zoom 9030 is that a
real thing cuz I've read about it. He's
like yeah. And he talks about how when
he's sitting there recording on his own
and he he runs Pro Tools himself and and
so he'll be sitting there. There's no
one there to help him.
He's like I'll just plug into this thing
and then I'll play a solo with this
modeler. It's like a
kind of 90s modeling early modeling
thing. Mhm. And he'll play a solo and
then after a while you hear the solo and
it's like
well, I'm not going to replay that. That
sounds great. You get used to the sound
of it and that's what it is. So people
always talk about oh well, he couldn't
have used that. He's recording through
an amp and cuz it sounds great. And uh
and then he's like yeah, yeah, so that's
what I use and then I have I have the
video of it right there and it says his
presets DG1 and DG2 and you know,
whatever.
What's your process for preparing for
interviews like that? You've done a few
legendary people. I never prepare for
interviews.
Because
I ask people things that I'm interested
in knowing. So just letting your
curiosity just pull it pull you forward.
>> I can think of a hundred questions to
ask David Gilmour. And but I always ask
my questions based on what they say to
me.
So but I do make a playlist of songs
that I want to talk about.
So that kind of guides me. Is that cuz I
want to make sure that I
there's specific things that I need to
play
to so that
you can jog his memory.
Cuz anytime you play something that
somebody recorded even 50 years ago,
they'll remember
if they don't remember the exact
specifics, they
that that brings it to life to them
again and they can
they can kind of piece together some
aspects about it and they can really
talk.
He can talk about the phrasing and the
you know, the kind of melodic direction
of things like that. So there's a lot of
tiny details that go into a particular
song whether it's in the production or
how it's played or how how it was
composed all that kind of stuff.
And you don't know what those are ahead
of time. No. You just know the song and
you just are looking to jog their memory
and maybe your own curiosity of like how
did you do this or how did what this
sound or that?
You make it look easy but
you have to have a depth of knowledge.
You're saying you don't prepare. I have
an incredibly good memory.
Exactly.
>> That's that's what it is. Is that I can
remember when records came out, who
produced them, where they recorded them,
who was the engineer, what this what
songs are on it.
And not only that but the with the
people I'm interviewing know that I can
play all the parts
of all the instruments cuz I've done
breakdowns of their songs which is why I
get the interviews
with them in the first place, really.
But the actual like the skill of the
interview, the thing you're not saying,
the preparation is the you young
listening to bebop. That's the it's the
background knowledge it's the soul
carrying with you being able to radiate
the love of the soul of music.
I will say this, Lex, is that the the
other thing is that
most of these people have a really good
sense of humor.
When I was when the first time I
interviewed David in New York, my
brother John came along and he is a
massive David Gilmour fan. That's his
biggest influence as a guitar player.
And so he said, "You're interviewing
David Gilmour? Well, I'm I'm coming." I
was like, "All right, come on. Come on
down." So
so my brother John stood about 5 ft away
and John is a sales guy but he great
guitar player. So John's like I was like
this is John this is David this is my
brother John.
David, great to meet you, buddy. And you
know, John's like it's so he's a sales
guy. And and uh so during the interview
I I I said I was like
"Hey John, what was I going to ask
David? Oh, ask him about the Gilmour
effect." Oh yeah, that's right. And the
Gilmour effect is my thing that I say in
the comment section when people say
anytime anybody plays anything technical
"Oh yeah, that's great but I much prefer
David Gilmour."
>> [laughter]
>> And uh so I always call it the Gilmour
effect. Anytime I have like Yngwie
Malmsteen, anybody that play that has
chops that I
interview, the the the negative comments
are always "Well, I prefer David
Gilmour."
And I said that I I told David that he's
like, "Well, maybe they should keep
their opinions to themselves."
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah, a lot of these folks have really
wonderful personalities with a with a
trusted person to be able to reveal that
personality. So come from the numb at
the top on that day, what else is up
there? Stairway to Heaven.
Hey Joe. What in that list
your top Hendrix solo was Hey Joe. It's
the first guitar solo I ever learned so
I had to put it on there. So I don't I
don't necessarily do these by
I do those in kind of how how important
they are to me and and my development.
So there there's always a biographical
component to these lists. Number three
was Kid Charlemagne a Steely Dan solo
Larry Carlton amazing solo extremely
difficult to figure out.
Probably
there's two solos on the list that are
just about are very that one I can play.
Uh well, there's a few solos that are
very hard to play. Stone in Love by
Journey by Neal Neal Schon is
very [clears throat] hard to play some
licks. Um
the um
there's a song there's a solo by
guitarist Carlos Rios that people don't
know. It's Brother to Brother Gino
Vannelli song but it's ex- very hard to
play
and figure out and um that people don't
know the solos. I put it on my list cuz
I knew a lot of people are going to
watch it and they're going to know what
this solo is. For me it's a sentimental
one. My my first solo is Mr. Crowley
Randy Rhoads.
I like the musicality Mr. Crowley that
there is a melodic component to it.
You're playing really fast but there's
there's a melody to it. And also there's
like a legendary nature to the the the
the brief time we had to we had Randy
Rhoads.
That's just probably one of the greatest
guitarists ever. 56 to 82 I think.
Terrible. Um
he was um
um absolute brilliant guitarist had his
own style. We should say he's the
guitarist for Ozzy Osbourne in the band.
Yeah. And uh that Mr. Crowley solo is a
is a great solo. Great solo and
um
he's incredibly influential as a guitar
player um too
for metal guitar players and um I love
Randy Rhoads. Uh another guy.
So one of my favorites is Mark Knopfler.
Yes. And I did have Mark Knopfler on my
list. Sultans of Swing. That's right.
You did have it
>> No, I had it high on the list and I'll
tell you why. I would have had had it
lower cuz it's one of the early ones cuz
I want people to be like, "Okay,
oh, this is a serious list.
So Rick's going to talk about serious
stuff. So um
and Rick's going to play along with all
these things.
>> [music]
[music]
>> So I wanted to kind of state that at the
beginning of the video. I mean I made
the video in one day to do 20 solos. I
think I played 19 of them but the Heart
solo that I had on there
Nancy Wilson I I played the video of and
I tried to get
a couple of my friends to play the Ice
Cream Man Van Halen solo. So I called
Dweezil Zappa and I was like, "Dweezil,
can you play the Ice Cream Man solo? I'm
making a video about it." He's like,
"Oh, I'd have to practice that." And I
called my friend Phil X who's amazing
guitar player and that and he's like,
"No, I'd have to practice that." I was
like, "Come on, man. Can't somebody play
Ice Cream Man?"
The opening lick of Ice Cream Man that
he plays is very hard to play cuz it's
an incredibly long stretch. And it hurt
[clears throat] my fingers to do and
Eddie would turn his guitar up like this
to to play. And plus it's a tricky
it's just it's a tricky rhythm
and and it's such a big stretch. I was
like, "Man, I can't that hurts my hand."
I just love that that's the Van Halen
solo you have.
>> [laughter]
>> The top 20. See, I have to do some
There's so many Van Halen. My God, it
could be there I could pick
25 different Van Halen solos. But to me
I mean
there really is nobody like Mark
Knopfler. I mean there's there's unique
guitarist. There's something about his
tone. Speaking of Gilmour
there's just the tone
the care
the timing of the notes
his improvisation like the live
performances of Sultans of Swing that's
been actually going
somewhat viral around a recent recently
his
his uh pretty old live performance of um
Sultans of Swing.
For me Brothers in Arms
these kind of
soulful mournful type of
solos he does really really well. Also
the interesting instrumentation of Romeo
and Juliet. Just so so many
it's truly one of the greats. Now,
obviously the intro to Money for Nothing
is is one of the greatest
almost impossible to recreate that
because of the sound is so unique and
his
it's just improvised.
It's so cool. Yeah. There's certain
songs like um Europa by Santana. Santana
can have that tone too. Yeah. That Mark
Knopfler makes me just how clean it is.
I think he beats B.B. King in my book on
terms of the cleanness of just
pure beauty of a single note. Like a
power of a single note. I don't know
anybody who beats Mark Knopfler. Well,
that thing about being able to recognize
somebody from a note. You know? When I
hear Brian May, I can immediately
recognize it's Brian May. Incredibly
melodic the tone that he has. Gilmour,
Hendrix.
Everyone that we're talking about Van
Halen it's just they have that
one note it's oh, I know who that is.
And that's
that's why they're talking about him.
That'd be funny. That'd be a good video.
>> BB King. You hear one note. As a test of
like
how quickly can you recognize just a
solo starts playing?
>> That's a great I'm going to make that
video tomorrow.
>> [laughter]
>> Lex, you just The day after tomorrow
you'll see it.
I would love to see that.
>> Can you say can you recognize these
players by one note?
>> By one note. Yeah, I think it's I think
we're being a little too aggressive with
that.
>> you need like two or three or four or
five notes.
>> you. So, I I was going to do a video
last week where I was going to play
uh songs in reverse, okay? See if you
can recognize these songs in reverse.
And I had my two assistants come in. I
was like, "Do you know what song that
is?" They're like, "Oh, that's Adele." I
like, "What?" And then they're like,
"Oh, that's that's Nirvana." Instantly
they could recognize. I was like, "Well,
that's not worth making a video." I
said, "Yeah, it's so obvious. You hear
the tone of the voice backwards,
forwards, doesn't matter. You know what
it is."
>> Okay. So, it's about the tone. Yeah. How
could you possibly know that from a
single note? It's
I guess Van Halen you can. One note of a
BB King's vibrato you could know.
I'm going to I What I'll do is I would
separate the guitars. I'll use I I can
actually separate the tracks and I'll
just play one note.
>> you can from a single vibrato you can
know it's BB King?
>> Yes.
Well, we'll see. Put on record. I'm
skeptical.
>> I'm going to do I'll do 20 of them. Can
you recognize these guitarists from a
single note? Could you recognize Stevie
Ray Vaughan? Absolutely.
>> versus
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> Eric Clapton?
Yeah.
All right.
You might be right. You might be right.
Quick 30-second thank you to our
sponsors. Check them out in the
description. It really is the best way
to support this podcast. Go to
lexfreedman.com/sponsors.
We got Uplift Desk for my favorite
office desks, BetterHelp for mental
health, Element for electrolytes, Finn
for customer service AI agents, Shopify
for selling stuff online, and Perplexity
for curiosity-driven knowledge
exploration. Choose wisely, my friends.
And now back to my conversation with
Rick Beato.
What do you think is the best Eric
Clapton song?
One of the things we haven't mentioned
so far is the importance of
lyrics and maybe meaning of the song and
what it represents. So, in that sense
Tears in Heaven
>> Well, the story behind that is is
heartbreaking. And then
I personally really love the sound of
Wonderful Tonight. That's a great song.
That's one of my favorite Clapton songs.
And I as I was like listening to it
just doing a whole personal journey
introspection knowing that I'm going to
talk to Rick Beato. I was
listening to just a bunch of songs.
And I I learned
as embarrassing that I didn't know the
the the stories behind the music, but
I learned that Eric Clapton was married
for 10 for decade
to the same woman that George Harrison
was married to.
And that this woman
was the muse, the inspiration for
for like so many of the legendary songs
of rock including uh Wonderful Tonight,
including Layla,
>> [clears throat]
>> and including George Harrison's
Something. Yeah. Legendary song
>> also. The same woman. Is she the
greatest muse in rock history?
>> Probably, yes. This is great.
Uh so, in your interviews of musicians
and producers
I think the thing you're ultimately
fascinated by is their whole the
process, the the recording, the
production, the songwriting, the
different elements of the process. So,
uh are there examples of different
things that stand out to you
from the all the interviews you've done?
And all By the way, all the recording
and production you've done yourself. So,
on the recording front, on the
production front, on the songwriting
process front just things that uh pop
into memory. When I've interviewed the
the guys that are the producers, like
Rick Rubin, Daniel Lanois, Brendan
O'Brien, Butch Vig, the thing about
producers as opposed to people that are
musicians, if you're in a musician, even
if you're David Gilmour, you're you do a
record and then you tour and then you do
another record maybe years go by. But
producers are working on multiple
records
you know, sometimes at a time. Rick
Rubin could be working on multiple
records and
and the variety of things that they do.
You can talk to I mean, I can talk to
Rick about the Chili Peppers. I can talk
to him about Johnny Cash. I can talk to
him about Tom Petty. And all these
records that I love and there's just so
many interesting stories that I mean,
these interviews could go on for for
days with with Rick.
And the variety of records that he
worked on and um
and there's so much knowledge to be
gained for me at least. And I think that
that the craft of production and
recording engineering is something that
is not well documented.
Um especially since there's no there's
so few studios nowadays where there used
to be a mentorship thing where you'd go
and you work as an assistant engineer
and you would work your way up. I
interviewed a guy named Ken Scott that
uh worked with the Beatles. I
interviewed him at Abbey Road Studios is
just 2 months ago.
And he started as a tape op when he was
16. He started on the uh Hard Day's
Night record with the Beatles. And he
worked his way up and he said the first
time he ever recorded an orchestra was
he recorded I'm the Walrus, the
orchestra part. He set up the mics and I
asked him I said, "So, where was the
band?" Standing right behind me, the
Beatles, right behind him. The guy I'm
interviewing at Abbey Road recorded I'm
the Walrus there. I mean, recorded many
Beatles songs.
And
and he was 18 years old and the I mean,
I just can't I can't even fathom that.
We They have a little cafe in the
basement of Abbey Road and I said,
"Did the Beatles come in here?" He goes,
"Oh, yeah, they come in here and get
coffee and I remember when they got two
microwaves that uh
like the first microwave in 1965 and
they were amazed by them and uh
it's hard to imagine that I'm talking to
people that worked on these historic
records. But, you know, they all start
with a blank tape or an empty hard
drive.
And then
you eventually fill them up with this
music that you can't you can never
imagine it not existing like Stairway to
Heaven or whatever it is. Yeah.
It's funny like looking back even
probably for them
just to realize they've created that
magic is hard to believe. Yeah. Cuz
you're looking at a blank thing and then
magic comes out and you don't even
you don't even understand. I You don't
even understand. Probably a lot of these
artists don't understand where that came
from.
They're channeling some
deeper thing. When I interviewed Brian
May, he told me I can't remember if this
was
if we talked about it on camera or not,
but we talked about Bohemian Rhapsody.
At the very end
there was a thing where he was
depressing his whammy bar a little bit
and it sounds like the piano is out of
tune. I never noticed it before he
mentioned this to me.
And
he said it always bothered him. And the
there's always something about these
songs that bothers people.
>> Mhm.
Even these songs
>> things, yeah. Right. There's always
little things and they they sit in there
and they hear it and they're like, "Oh,
man, I wish I'd been up a little higher
on that" or whatever. I mean, that that
there's certain moments in songs
that are just
unlike anything else. On Bohemian
Rhapsody when Freddie Mercury is
sometimes wish I've never been born at
all. Mhm. And then guitar comes in. I
mean, there's just nothing like that.
Yeah. That was that I don't even know.
I mean, that that whole thing and you've
done videos on it. It's incredibly
complicated composition. It's it's crazy
that a popular song, popular rock song
could be this operatic, so complicated.
The other thing akin to that moment is
uh
Phil Collins with uh In the Air Tonight,
the drum bridge. do do do do do do do do
do
>> Yeah.
Yeah, what is that? I killed it. I don't
I don't understand how you can create
that. What is that? Why is that so
magical? Why is that so singular inside
a particular song and in rock history,
period? Like these moments.
I don't know. Musically, I don't
understand how you create them. Cuz it
might be bigger than musical. Might be
cultural all a bunch of different
elements. And plus it's him, Phil, with
like I've seen live before where he has
like a headset. He does There's
something
He's like a telemarketer something. Like
this whole vibe and look to him. He's
doesn't look like a rock star.
But he is. Those are hooks. When you
think about it, right? It's like it's as
much of a hook as any as the chorus of
the song or any song. That drum thing is
something that people wait for and they
air drum to it. Everybody air drums to
it. And it is a hook. And those are hard
to create. Those are those moments are
really hard to create and usually
they're done by accident.
Yes, it's hard if you chase it, you're
not going to get it. Yeah.
In your conversation with Sting
>> [snorts]
>> he said something about
um
how modern music is simpler.
Uh more minimalistic and the bridge is
gone, I think he said. And he said he
thought that the bridge is therapy.
Yes.
It's like a chance for you to reflect, I
guess, on the verse. Right.
>> Before the chorus comes in.
It changed my view of the bridge, I
suppose, the therapeutic nature of it,
at least lyrically.
Um you think he's on to something, the
value of the bridge? The bridge is a
place,
I think, where you can kind of change
the
frame of reference of a song. You could
probably do anything, I guess. Lennon
used to he would have some
kind of biting lyrics, like um
We can work it out. So, McCartney writes
the, you know, try to see it my way, do
I have to keep on going till I can't go
on. And then but the bridge is very
Lennon. Life is very short and there's
no time for fussing and fighting, my
friend. I have always thought that it's
a crime. So, I'll ask you once again. I
mean, it's very, you know, very
Lennon-esque. This is That was really a
kind of a
uh
real collaboration between the two of
those. This is where different parts of
the band can clash in interesting ways.
I mean, the Beatles are the epitome of
that. Such like each individual Beatle
is
uh
a great talent in their own right. Yes.
How were the Beatles able to create some
of the greatest songs of all time all
before they turned 30 years old? I
have never been able to figure that out.
But, I have a theory that
>> [laughter]
>> because I have a theory. Because PA
systems were so bad back then and the
Beatles people screamed so loudly that
the Beatles thought, "Okay,
we don't we don't need we can't tour
anymore cuz we can't even hear
ourselves. So, we're just going to be a
studio band."
And maybe because of we have all these
great late Beatles records are from 1966
on
just because they had bad PA systems.
Mhm.
And
they had no monitors, you know, they're
in Shea Stadium, people are screaming so
loudly they can't hear themselves.
They're like, "Okay, forget this. We
can't tour. We'll just make studio
records." So, that's what they did. And
in that one year like from August 6th,
1965, they put out Help! Then in
December 3rd they put out Rubber Soul of
'65. Then then August
5th, they put out Revolver. So, within
365 days, they put out three 14 I think
14-song records.
So, they wrote and recorded three
incredibly important records. So, they
were
in the studio. It's like working out.
They're practicing their craft every
day, writing songs, trying to outdo the
other ones.
And
so, you had the the perfect thing of of
four supremely talented
musicians, songwriters, singers.
And then the best producer you could
possibly have, George Martin.
And and it was just a perfect storm.
I think that
when I would talk to friends that would
just play in local clubs and they'd play
4-hour sets five nights a week and they
never lost their voices because they're
always working those muscles.
>> Mhm. And same with the Beatles, they
were always in the studio singing every
single day, doing takes. And
and I think that that was part of it, at
least. But, you also have this theory
that
uh
you know, that the greatest productivity
that musicians have is before they turn
30.
The the greatest sort of creative genius
that can come out of the human mind
musically is before the age of 30.
>> I think it's the same in mathematics as
well. That you have this fluid
intelligence versus crystallized
intelligence. Fluid intelligence up
until you're about, you know, in your
late 20s, 30 years old. And then
crystallized, so you're using the
crystallized is you're using your life
experience to
to write things. So, you'll find that
that composers, Bach, Beethoven, Mozart
wrote their most important works at the
end of their lives. Beethoven, the late
string quartets, the ninth symphony,
things like that. So, they have a whole
lifetime of experience that lead up to
this and there's not they're not
improvising. But, things for
improvising, writing pop songs, and
that
I think when your mind is really most
active and your brain processing speed
is at its
pinnacle
that
this is my theory that people can
uh come up with those kind of ideas.
Same with improvising. I think that most
jazz improvisers, not all
but most do their best improvising
before age 30. Creating something new.
>> Yes. Truly novel. That that requires a
youth.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> It's just a theory, though, but it seems
to apply. What do you think about the
the 27 Club? A bunch of the music greats
died at 27. Hendrix, Brian Jones, Jim
Morrison, Janis Joplin, Amy Winehouse,
Kurt Cobain. Kurt Cobain, of course.
A big part of music history is linked to
drug history. Mhm.
You mean LSD,
coke, heroin,
weed, smoking. Smoking. I think about
this a lot. If you go back and you watch
videos, the Beatles any of their movies,
they're smoking all the time.
The Get Back documentary, they're
smoking constantly. Go watch any of the
MTV Unplugged, Nirvana, Kurt Cobain is
smoking every second that he's not
playing. He's smoking.
Every singer smoked. Every musician
smoked. Nowadays
I asked my son Dylan, "Dylan, does
anybody smoke at his high school?" He's
like, "Smoke? Nobody smokes." He He
thought that it was an absurd question.
And that was part of culture. It was for
everybody. I mean, that was that was a
big transformation over the past 20
years that just everybody
stopped smoking. But, I don't think
smoking has the kind of hard negative
effect that we're talking about. I mean,
I almost would rather have them smoke
than some of the other hard drugs. Maybe
smoking distracts them from the hard
I mean, heroin and coke, I mean, those
those things really and alcohol,
unfortunately, Mhm.
can be easily abused, I think.
It seems like it's a
the the life of a musician
this dopamine thing
of
getting on stage and be
being adored by tens of thousands,
hundreds of thousands of people, the
high of that, and then the come down
after
is really hard life for just even
neurobiologically of like, how do you
deal with that? You have to be able to
control
the roller coaster of your mind. And of
course, drugs will be a part of that.
And you think everything is allowed and
everything is possible.
And then there's also culture, depending
on who you hang out with,
that certain kinds of categories of
drugs are good for your creativity.
Mhm. And so
naturally
start to abuse those drugs.
I don't know.
I think I think I think it's really
interesting the role that drugs have
played in the in the history of music.
They have certainly been extremely
destructive.
But, they have also certainly been
productive
uh muses, inspirations for some of these
folks. Oh, absolutely. Now,
would we want to, you know, advocate
people doing things like that to boost
their creativity?
No.
>> wouldn't, but
just like smoking, which I think
improved people's voices.
>> [laughter]
>> I mean, it really the raspiness of it.
This is the reason that the that that so
many of these virtually every famous
singer
no matter what genre music, jazz, soul,
rock, they all smoked. Nat King Cole
Yeah. Miles Davis, too? Miles smoked
Everybody smoked. Miles didn't Well,
Miles
was a heroin addict, too. I mean,
so many jazz musicians. But, Miles had a
sound to him. You You're right. I mean,
smoking must
must play a
gigantic role to that, adding some
complexity to the voice.
Yes. Yeah, some richness to the voice.
>> Nat King Cole, he's he smoked, I think,
four packs a day. He died of lung
cancer.
Um lot of heavy smokers, those singers.
Frank Sinatra, heavy smoker. McCartney
was a heavy smoker. Lennon, all those
guys smoked. Yeah, it's hard to know
chicken or the egg. But, I certainly
wouldn't recommend doing drugs as a way
to get better at music.
>> [laughter]
>> But, you know, it does seem to go hand
in hand. And some of it has to do with
the period, with the time period, with
the with the place.
Cuz sometimes it's part of the culture,
the drug use like you're saying,
smoking.
If you're smoking now, that's going to
be a very different experience than
smoking 10 years ago, 20 years ago, 50
years ago. It's a different different
vibe. So, sometimes the drug is a deep
integrated part of the culture versus an
actual chemical substance.
The '60s, right? They're I don't know,
they were on everything in the '60s.
Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> I mean, it has to account for something,
Lex. You know,
uh on the songwriting front, you
mentioned a story about Elton John
recording.
So, he's one of the legendary
songwriters. But, yeah, you've met him
and you know something about the process
of his um Yeah, cuz he was recording in
a studio in Atlanta that I was working
with a band that I was producing. and he
was in I was in studio B, he was in
studio A
and this band that I was working with
they were called Jump Little Children
and so he had his assistant come in and
ask hey is this are you guys Jump Little
Children? Yeah, yeah.
And then all of a sudden
I couldn't see out into the live room.
Elton walked into the thing and we were
getting ready to track and I'm I'm
pressing the button. Yo, where are where
are you guys? What's up? I thought we're
going to start this.
And no one's responding. I can hear
talking. I was like what what's going
on? Where are they? Then all of a sudden
they come back in the studio and they
were stunned. I said where were you
guys?
Elton John just walked into our session
and he said he's a big fan. He said to
come over when we're done and and hang
out in studio A. So
so we did and he was there with Bernie
Taupin they were working on a song and
he we talked with him for for an hour
and he was talking about
recording two records a year and then
they'd go out on tour and they'd write
and record the whole record in two
weeks. So Bernie would give him lyrics.
Elton would go out and spend 15 minutes
writing all the melody. He'd look at his
lyrics and he was doing that that day.
Bernie was there and they had a lyric
sheet up in the piano.
And Elton would go on and they just okay
just record this and Elton would sit
there and
and play and come up with the song
in 15 minutes or so. Yeah, it's There's
a great version of I think Tiny Dancer
where Elton is coming up with it on it's
on YouTube. And he's just coming up with
the music right there and then the band
okay here's how it goes and they record
it right then.
They move on to the next session. It's
really incredible. Yeah.
That's it. Yeah. Dude, there's one video
that I sort of done the other day with
Tiny Dancer which is about Bernie's
girlfriend. So I just sort of
run it through and then put two verses
together then a middle eight then a
chorus and then back to the sort of
verse sort of thing. It's it's a very it
happens very quickly. It sounds long but
it's sort of
it's sort of starts off
blue jean baby
LA lady
seems dressed for the band.
iron smile [singing]
pretty eyes
you're married
Okay. It's really amazing that he just
He's looking at it just the lyrics.
>> Yeah, and it's one of the he's one of
the very few people that has the lyrics
first and writes the music to it which
to me is far more difficult. 99% of
songwriters write the music first and
then they put the melody and lyrics to
the finished backing track. And maybe
they write like lyrics they write like
uh nonsense words kind of thing.
And they figure out from there. Yeah,
that's I mean I don't know what skill
that is exactly. But that's incredible.
I mean in that process he makes it his
own. Yes.
Okay,
uh you had an amazing interview with uh
Kirk Hammett. I'm a huge Metallica fan.
Same here.
>> [laughter]
>> Uh there's a lot of interesting stuff
that came out of that from that
conversation.
Uh one is the distinction between heavy
metal and hard rock which is very
interesting. Of course Metallica went
through their own evolution.
They had many periods. I mean they've
been around 40 years. Over 40 years,
yeah. Crazy.
The other thing is the down picking
which is interesting
which is creating that really distinct
sound. James and Kirk's the the down the
down picking
I used to be able to do that. I just
can't do that anymore. It hurts my thumb
to to do it. I think honestly I I
thought a lot about it. It's like why
does it why is it so painful? Why is it
so hard? It's from swiping with your
thumb on phones.
And I think it affects that basal joint
there and I'm so it no I'm serious. I
think that that's actually right cuz I'm
thinking like why does that hurt so much
to do that? All the down strokes and
stuff.
It's got to be something. It's like yeah
it's from from swiping with a phone. The
other thing that came through was um
that he's a improviser at heart.
And that I think clashes with this kind
of rigid structure that metal is.
So there's a real soulful melodic aspect
to him. And he gave a lot of props to
James Hetfield for just being a great
composer being a great musician and
writer of riffs of rhythm. The
improvisation part of it you don't think
of cuz they they cuz you have the
finished songs that you listen to.
But those songs are born out of
improvisations of jams of little
fragments of ideas and then they craft
them into these masterpieces.
Also he mentioned that this is weird
that I didn't know
that Hendrix was used different gauges
strings. Yeah, he was the one that
talked about that, wasn't he? Yeah, that
was really interesting. See these are
the things that I like to learn
from
uh from these interviews with these
people.
I'm like what? Why have I never heard of
that? It's like it's one of the ways you
can find
uniqueness of sound is by trying
different things that are not I mean I
guess Zappa was really good at this,
right? It's completely breaking out of
what you're supposed to do the ways
you're supposed to do them and doing it
completely differently.
Uh you often ask musicians what their
perfect song is. First of all it's a
interesting question.
What is a perfect song? Like what
surprised me is Hans Zimmer said God
only knows by the Beach Boys.
>> [laughter]
>> I was surprised by that too. But I
thought it was like yeah okay that's a
perfect song for sure. The first
interview I ever did was with Peter
Frampton in 2018.
And I asked him in that interview what's
a perfect song and he said Whiter Shade
of Pale and I was like ooh that's a
great song. And
then I thought
I'm going to ask that to people just to
see what they now people are prepared if
I ask that. But it's like They're
willing to go out on a limb and say it.
>> Yeah. Like if you ask me I don't even
know. I guess you just say it whatever,
right? Like what would I even say?
What's a perfect song?
Yeah, I would go see I feel the
pressure. Right? Because the problem is
the reality is
it changes day by day.
Like minute by minute.
I
Yeah, I would probably I'm sorry but I
would have to go Mark Knopfler and I
would probably go
Is it is it really cheesy to say the
obvious thing? I would go Sultans of
Swing.
Even though like I'm tempted to say
Europa but then like Sultans of Swing
hits on so many levels cuz it's got
a great melody, great lyrics and then
multiple great guitar solos. And it has
such a unique sound to it. The other
thing is that it sounds very different
from other Dire Straits songs. I mean
it's like early Dire Straits strat tone
and then you think of like Money for
Nothing is a Les Paul and it's a
totally different kind of
vibe than him playing on on Sultans of
Swing. But that song is amazing. Plus it
it's about music. Yes. So it's like
there's a there's a meta
aspect to it. But then there's also like
we're talking about this guitar stuff
but Leonard Cohen
Hallelujah.
I mean Leonard Cohen in general like
these songwriters that go super simple
on guitar. Mhm. And they're it's just uh
what's that called? Singer-songwriter
type.
Uh I told you all
my uh
one of my maybe the music guest that's a
dream guest is Tom Waits.
>> [sighs]
>> I've wanted to talk to Tom Waits for a
very long time and I've gone through
different periods of
you've met me at a point in my life
where I've given up on it on it a little
bit. I was told it's going to happen
once. Okay. Once you give up on it
it's going to happen. Yeah. Yeah.
Um But Tom Waits won't be on your
podcast. Exactly. [laughter] Exactly,
dude. This is this is my this is my
moment.
>> Tom come come here.
Let's do it. I want to see it. I'm such
a a fan of like the Zappa like artistry
on the on the musical front which Tom
Waits has but I'm a I'm a sucker for
great lyrics.
Lyrics to me is such a big part of great
songs.
And and he's another example. He has a
song called Martha.
It's about a love story that didn't work
out and it's an older man calling the
woman that he was in love with
and basically reminiscing about like
time you know thinking about like what
what would have happened if it worked
out that kind of thing.
And then you know I love that song for a
long time and you know
uh at some point I found out that he
wrote that when he was in his early 20s.
And you realize similar with the Beatles
like the these guys somehow are able to
capture the human condition so
masterfully.
And they're kids.
>> Yes.
This I don't get it. I don't understand
it. I can't speak for Tom Waits but in
the Beatles
case they went to Hamburg. They spent
time on their own. They played cover
gigs that were 8 hours long and they
lived Yeah, they've lived. They lived
life. Yeah. It's not like not like kids
today.
>> [laughter]
>> Now you're on a porch.
Uh you also had uh an amazing interview
with Billy Corgan. That's Smashing
Pumpkins. [snorts]
Uh he is definitely one of my favorite
musicians.
>> Billy. You asked him an interesting
question about how he creates this
melancholy feeling that permeates a lot
of his songs.
And he jokingly said that uh the secret
is all about the seventh and then and
the ninth.
Um
So like musically chord wise what do you
think about that? You think he's onto
something? He's talking a little music
theory there.
>> Yeah, yeah. Seventh and ninth over the
chord that he's playing. So, if you're
playing a C chord, he's singing a B
would be the seventh, D would be the
ninth.
And he does use a lot of those notes.
But,
almost all these people that we're
talking, no, all these people that we're
talking about use these notes, and this
is why their songs I and when I
interviewed Sting, I called them
surprise tones, and Sting's like, I like
the way you use the word surprise.
Notes that are outside the chord that
are dissonant with the chords that
they're playing, and that creates
emotion. Dissonance equals emotion.
And that's that's what I like. I want
music to be to depress me.
Yeah, what is that? I don't know. They
But melancholy and I think you are
articulating that in a reason.
It's not actually that depressing.
There's something about that melancholy
feeling
that is somehow the other side of the
coin of happiness. It's a kind of
longing. Yes.
There's a hopefulness to it, that
aloneness that you feel. I mean, that's
actually like one of the intimate
connections you have with music is when
you're alone. There's I think there's a
social way of listening to music, when
maybe at a concert and so on.
But, there's this There's nothing like
you're alone in the car
driving
listening to like whatever it is, Bruce
Springsteen.
Uh I think Louis C.K. has a bit about
that. And was it Bruce Springsteen?
But, he sometimes has to pull over to
the side of the road just weep or
something like this. This
is just There's some There's something
about that. Sometimes a song just
connects with you, and I don't know it
Nothing like a melancholy song can do
that.
It You think about like
this maybe things you regret, or how
life could have worked out. And
sometimes it's not even about like
it's not even real. It's just connects
something to this in the soul. The the
uneasiness that we all feel, maybe the
loneliness we all feel that underpins so
much of the human condition. It just
connects to that. I don't know what that
is.
>> Kurt Cobain lyric that was on the In
Utero record from the song Frances
Farmer.
The chorus part is, I miss the comfort
of being sad.
And I was like, yes.
I miss the comfort of being sad.
I was like, yeah, that's it right there.
In terms of love songs,
somehow I find powerful
that kind of desperation. So, like I
I've always connected with Pearl Jam's
Black. Oh.
Amazing. Uh
that line as a friend of mine was going
through a breakup, so I was listening
and he he's the one that introduced me
to Pearl Jam during that that whole
period
uh when Pearl Jam was huge uh with 10.
Is Is that line is
someday Someday you'll have a beautiful
life.
You know, someday you'll be a star in
somebody else's sky. Why why why can't
it be can't it be mine? Oh my god, that
Yeah. blows me away. That's an amazing
line. Why, yeah. Eddie The delivery is
incredible on it, too. Eddie Vedder, one
of the great frontmen of all time.
>> Yes.
>> And that whole period that whole moment
in history
uh of Kurt Cobain and Eddie Vedder that
captured
That was the '90s. That was one side of
the '90s that just this singular moment
in history. Um
Who Who do you think are the great
frontmen
in the history of music? Freddie
Mercury,
Robert Plant, Freddie Mercury number
one, probably. Steven Tyler, Jim
Morrison, Jim Morrison
Yeah.
Roger Daltrey,
um Well, we have to say I have to say we
have to say James Hetfield. James
Hetfield? I mean, There's nothing I have
I mean, I have to talk to you about
this. I have I mean, this is the
greatest I think the greatest concert of
all time. This is uh their historic
performance in Moscow in um September of
'91. This is shortly before the Soviet
Union collapsed.
Plus, we should mention AC/DC and
Pantera Mhm. [clears throat] were there,
too. And about 1.6 million people were
there.
Now, by the way, there's like some kind
of recording that it was a half a
million people,
500,000 people. That's somewhere I've
seen statements like that. That's a
ridiculously inaccurate statement. So,
it's a free concert. So, any official
counts
don't count.
It's uh it's it's definitely over a
million. It's It's very likely to be
1.5, 1.6 million people. And this moment
in history that I think they channeled
It's like whenever great music the
Metallica was firing on all cylinders,
at the very top of their game, and they
meet this moment in history in this
place in history that was a a defining
part of the 20th century collapsing, and
you have these people
who are
um
for a moment through music are able to
escape the fear, the anger they feel,
the all of it. So, it's also political,
social, cultural moment meeting
the musical moment. And the the setlist
I was just I was I listened to this
several times over the past few days
just taking myself back into that moment
in time. Listen to this setlist.
Enter Sandman, Creeping Death, Harvester
of Sorrow, Fade to Black, Sad
but True, Master of Puppets, Seek and
Destroy, For Whom the Bell
Look at that.
How is that that
just That's my kind of set.
>> is amazing. This is
>> kind of set right there.
I don't know if you could think of
anything that could beat that. I think
that the guys in the band would say
that, too. That was I mean, they were
really at their
at their peak. The Black Album had just
come out
then, and
that must have been so
so exciting.
I mean, Woodstock was big. There's
There's certain moments in time when
they really really meet the moment. Are
you a fan of live
live like big I used to be, but at this
point Yeah. I can't uh you know.
I'd much rather see people play in small
clubs and or
go to the I'd like to listen to the
studio.
Go to the studio, even. I generally
almost entirely agree with you.
I just think that there's these historic
moments, but you don't know which you're
going to be which.
But, you're making the concert free.
It's just all of it to get plus Pantera
and AC/DC.
>> [sighs]
>> The other which actually is a legitimate
thing you mentioned is uh as one of the
greatest concerts of all time
is [clears throat] Beethoven's world
premiere of Ninth Symphony. You know, I
didn't really know the personal side of
Beethoven until I saw this movie called
Immortal Beloved. It's an excellent
movie with Gary Oldman. Just a really is
a masterful uh celebration of Beethoven
in an interesting kind of way through
the perspective of a love letter that
he's written.
But, then I realized like this is
already as many many
couple decades ago now, that you know,
he went deaf before he even started
writing the Ninth Symphony, which is why
they consider it to be one of the
greatest compositions of all time, the
greatest symphonies of all time. He went
deaf, couldn't hear anything
before he even started writing it. And
so, there's that famous story of
him in that world premiere of having to
be turned around because he can't hear
people applauding. So, he has to
be turned around to see that people are
actually clapping. I mean, there's just
this whole tragic element plus
the the meaning of the symphony that
ends in this beautiful uh Ode to Joy.
The symphony itself is a kind of
it starts with a chaos and conflict and
ends
with this celebration of
peace and
brotherly unity.
And a
I guess a call for that, a reaching for
that, for that peace. And it's a there's
a tragic element to it again connected
to history, which is it was
post-Napoleonic Wars Mhm. and before the
American Civil War. So, like you're in
this in this middle
this respite from from war calling for
peace, not knowing that
uh truly horrific wars are coming soon.
You have the the American Civil War, and
you have the of course the two World
Wars
coming. So, this all of it together, and
the fact that he's conducting deaf, and
he wrote this whole thing deaf. I was
reading a lot about his process, and he
just edits and edits and edits and
edits. So, the fact that he had to edit
in his head
is just insane. I mean, Beethoven was
sick all the time, too. I mean, there a
lot of people were sick all the time. It
was very common.
What would motivate you
to write
music, this beautiful music that you can
never actually hear except for in your
head, right? Like why [clears throat]
the amount of time it takes to write
>> [laughter]
>> to write a 35-minute, 40-minute piece,
all the parts, you got to hear all the
orchestration in your head, you're
editing, you're doing all these things.
Where do you get the motivation when you
can't
hear
the actual finished work? Well, then
then people would say, well, he's hear
hear it in his head. But, what kind of
enjoyment is it? You want to hear the
orches- I mean, it's really a profound
that he
that
that he was inspired to do this. There's
a thing called the Heiligenstadt
Testament that he wrote. It was a letter
to his
brothers in from 1802. I think they
found it in his desk after Beethoven
died. And he felt a sense of shame and
humiliation
because of his hearing loss and he said
that he was afflicted with this thing
where
him of all people
that someone standing next to him could
hear a flute that he could not hear or a
shepherd singing in the field that and
he could not hear this and and of all
the people why him where hearing played
such an important part. Another person
that had would have
had to have had perfect pitch cuz you
could never do this. Mhm.
If [clears throat] you didn't have
perfect pitch, which I think all these
great composers for the most part Brahms
didn't from what I know, but all the
rest of them for sure had perfect pitch.
So they could hear these things in their
head and that's how they composed. I
mean you love sound
and music.
What do you think it was like gradually
losing your hearing for Beethoven?
It must have been
terrible.
I mean I just
terrible. I mean I have heard things
where he had a would have a stick in his
mouth and and put it on the soundboard
of the piano and you could feel the
vibrations
in his skull and things like that.
>> trying to Yeah.
I just
But also there's what is what is that
that he's able to write
like one of the greatest symphonies ever
while deaf.
So there there's something about that we
mentioned darkness but torment
that he's going through.
And ultimately Ode to Joy like
not a cynical thing, but a call for the
positive.
>> [snorts]
>> Yeah.
Yeah. That's that's
I I
I have devoted many many hours thinking
about that. And plus Napoleon broke his
heart
because he was a supporter of Napoleon
because Napoleon was supposed to
represent represent
the French Revolution, this this hopeful
future of no more kings, no more
monarchs, no more authoritarian regimes
and Napoleon ended up becoming
essentially king. Right. Uh becoming
authoritarian and Beethoven
um
sort of
famously was critical of that.
Nevertheless, I think maintained a
fascination with Napoleon throughout his
life. But sort of a kind of more
sophisticated complex view of human
nature and human civilization. So
becoming more cynical. Like seeing
more clearly that the world disappoints
you, that dreams get shattered and
through that is able to still
do this call for the hopeful future.
All right. So Okay, so Beethoven one of
the greats for sure.
Like basically everybody I know how to
play the first movement of Moonlight
Sonata, but I always avoided the third
movement cuz I was like I'm never be
good enough.
>> [laughter]
>> Never.
Never.
>> [clears throat]
>> Never say never like Like one of these
days
maybe. You know what would be great if
Tom Waits writes me an email that says,
"I only talk to people that can play the
third movement."
>> Play the third movement. That would be
that would be a dream come true. There
you go. It'd be like for this That's
motivation.
>> dragon or whatever you do you have to
have a prince and rescue the princess.
My dragon is the third movement of
Moonlight Sonata. Okay.
Uh you often highlight the importance of
Bach. In fact, so many of your guests
Every famous songwriter is influenced by
Bach. It they are.
The greatest composer of all time, the
greatest musician of all time. Even
Sting and Dominic Miller said they go to
Bach even for like practice. Every day.
People talk about Bach was not known
other than in his
places he lived. Eisenach, he was born
in Leipzig, he spent many years.
Uh but Bach was known to
great musicians. It was difficult to
find manuscripts, but
there was a premiere of the St. Matthew
Passion that Mendelssohn had done in 17
in 1829. It was on March 11th, I
believe.
He had a manuscript because
uh his father and mother collected
manuscripts Mhm. and he got a manuscript
of this piece and he I think he was 20
years old and and they had a performance
of it
in Berlin
and
Beethoven, Mozart, they studied the
Well-Tempered Clavier, the two books of
the Well-Tempered Clavier. But um Bach
wrote profoundly beautiful music and
some of the most complex contrapuntal
music that I don't think anyone has ever
done like that.
Extremely bright guy. Had 20 kids, 10 of
them only 10 survived till adulthood.
Lost both his parents when he was nine
within nine months of each other. Went
to live with an older brother. Extremely
productive. Yes. I saw. I yeah.
I think
from all the music teachers I've ever
had,
I understood the importance
of studying Bach. He didn't write Master
of Puppets, but he wrote some great
powerful music.
>> Well put.
I I I tried to um
educate
music teachers
of the brilliance of the Master of the
Puppets.
Uh sometimes a good riff is greater than
any any musical composition.
>> I I agree. I go back and I play Master
of Puppets
every time I'm trying out a new
amplifier.
That's my go-to.
>> go-to.
>> [laughter]
>> So like so the the the stereotypical
like guitar store
when you come in you're playing Master
of Puppets.
>> I'll play Master of Puppets. I I will
play I have to play some heavy riff.
Mhm. And so usually it will default to
some Metallica or something like that.
Or I'll play Alice in Chains or
I do usually like a lot of times I'll go
and I'll do drop D something or play
Tool. Mhm. I usually would do something
do do some drop tuning thing. It's It's
got always got to be some some type of
metal that I'll test to see if the if
the bottom end's tight on the amp and
stuff. So yes.
All right, we have to talk about this a
little bit. You made a bunch of videos
about it.
There was a there's a moment in time. It
still goes on, but there was a moment
where it was really people are freaking
out about the use of AI in music. Mhm.
Uh
so there's these I would say incredible
apps like Suno, UDO.
11 Labs music is also great.
They can generate basically text-to-song
full song from a text prompt.
And
a lot of people start freaking out just
but based on how good it is. Mhm. And so
you start to immediately imagine how
this is going to transform music and
you're going to replace musicians and
all that kind of stuff.
Uh it is legitimately nerve-racking
because these are early versions so you
don't know where it goes.
But in your intuition now, you've been
thinking about this, you made a bunch of
videos. Now like being able to reflect,
okay, everybody chill.
Calm down. So If you write a prompt in
Suno and it spits out a song, which I've
did I've done made bunch of videos in
this. I made up a fake artist Eli Mercer
in this video. Then I did a thing for
CBS News. I made up this fake artist
Sadie Winters and came up with this song
Walking Away. Well, the computer the
program came up with it.
>> There is some creativity in a process.
So in this particular thing the process
is you generate an image. I did it in
ChatGPT the image. Then I went to then I
went to Claude and I wrote the lyrics
cuz Claude's way better at lyrics than
Suno is. Suno's bad at lyrics at least
right now. So I So I did I created the
lyrics in Claude and then I imported the
lyrics into Suno and I had great results
with the songs that I came up that it
came up with. I always have to qualify
that.
But I started thinking about this.
People freak out about this. Oh, this is
bad. This is bad. And then I thought I
was like, no.
Who are people going to be the ones that
are going to benefit from AI? Well, the
people that are already great
songwriters because you have to be able
to recognize when it spits out something
good versus when it spits out something
that's not that good. Mhm. And every
other song
I I've probably created 130 song ideas
out of which there's three good ones.
And there's a thing that's happening
where people's ear very quickly is is
becoming attuned to AI slop. Yes. And
that's actually quite fascinating.
Like for example,
one of the things there's this viral
clip going around of an AI bass like a
soul jazz remix of songs like 50 Cent
Many Men. And I think it is super
impressive and it's a different pipeline
actually. It's a tricky pipeline how to
pull that off and I think a lot of the
creativity in that
even that kind of remixing is in the
pipeline
that of how you actually do that because
there's actually a lot of manual stuff
in that pipeline. Uh
but I think ironically it's very cool at
first.
But when you listen to it for a while
you understand that this is AI slop.
Yes. For a soul remix
it it actually lacks soul. But it made
me think of like when I listen to soul
or blues, I think I really want in that
case to know
I don't want a AI BB King.
I want the real BB King. And I if I
if I know if any AI is involved in a BB
King process, I'm tuning out.
>> Yes. And I don't think I'm being
curmudgeonly old dude in that. I think
we humans want
authenticity.
So when when AI when I first started
making these AI videos, this started
back in 2023. I made my first one.
And
I would take my phone,
come up in the kitchen, I'd play a song,
and then my
my youngest and Dylan, my youngest
Layla, and I have three kids. And my
oldest Dylan,
as soon as I played "Why are you
listening to AI?" And I was like, "Oh my
god, instantly." I was like, "How do you
know?" "Oh, it has this ringing sound in
the thing." So, it took me
probably about four or five days to
figure, "Okay, what are they hearing
that I'm not hearing?" So, I did it I
separated all the parts, and what
they're hearing
was the artifacts that are in the vocal
reverb that sound that were
uh that made incomplete. It just
couldn't do the ambiences correctly,
right? Cuz it's trained on
a lot of these AI programs are trained
on very low bit bit rate uh MP3s, right?
So, they feed all this stuff in there.
So, they're getting really inferior
information on the tr- in the training
process. Whereas now, when they make
these deals with the major labels,
they'll get the multi-tracks, and
they'll get high-quality wave files to
train from, right?
And whoever opts in, they get the solo
vocal tracks, you know, if Ed Sheeran
wants to do it or Drake or whoever wants
to give their voice to it, let it do its
thing, and then get their royalties from
it.
I'm not saying that any any of them are
doing. I'm just giving an example. But,
every time that I would do it, I could
be down the hall, and I would play
something on my phone just to see if
they'll like, "Why are you listening to
AI?" Oh, they can instantly tell. Then
eventually, it started getting better.
And then and then it'd be like,
"Is this AI?" I'd be in the car with
Layla coming back from Taekwondo
practice, and she's like,
"Is this AI? Why does it sound like AI?
Sounds like it could be AI." And I'd be
like, "Yeah, it's AI." She's like, "Oh,
it's getting better." Mhm. And then I
did this song for um it was an NPR
interview. I created a song with a fake
artist, and the song was called Neon
Ghosts, and I played it for Layla in the
car. She's like,
"Can you separate the tracks?" I said,
"Yeah, I have them separated back home."
"Okay, I want to go down here." So, we
go down to studio, and
and I play it for her, and she listens
to the soloed vocal. She said,
"Wow, this is really realistic." Mhm.
>> "This is very hard to tell even with the
soloed vocal. I I think the room for
creativity
right now
for humans is lyrics.
It seems like the lyrics that are being
generated, they lack soul somehow, and
that's I don't know the words correctly.
Yeah. I mean, they can be incredibly
sophisticated, but there's so something
the edge is not there. Some kind of edge
that you we want in our lyrics, some
kind of surprise,
but not cringe or not cliché.
It
some something truly novel in the
lyrics.
The but that if that's the case,
it's kind of sad that
um
that
that's where the creativity has to come
from, but not from the music.
Because then if we can create very
realistic music that sounds really damn
good,
where's the role of the musician there?
I think the role of the musician is that
in actually
if they use AI to assist them in coming
up with ideas, they
as a creation tool, then the musician
the some of the stuff is just not
high-quality sonically high-quality. So,
the musician goes in and redoes stuff
and changes things and adds parts, and
then they actually do music production.
And maybe they re-sing the parts, and
they change the stuff, and then then
it's just basically like an idea
generator. And I think that that's a
great use of AI
is for that. But but see, if you do
that,
does it make you sad that you don't
necessarily need to learn instruments?
So,
basically, you can
I mean, you can think of it as a
different kind of instrument, but you
can write lyrics, you can hum the
melody, you can just hum parts.
>> Yeah.
You know? And then and then do AB kind
of thing, this kind of rhythm, this kind
of and stitch them together, and never
actually have your
fingers on a guitar or
or fingers on a drumstick.
>> not going to use AI, Lex, is for that
reason, because
to me, it's just boring. And I when I
use it, it's it's like
>> Ugh.
But I I used it for about a month or so
just cuz I was making videos, and I was
trying to see how it's advancing. Every
every three or four months, I'll I'll
I'll sit down, and I'll see whatever new
versions they have, and I'll write some
songs. Write some songs. I'll prompt
some songs,
and see what they come up with, and see
if they're improving on the things. But
ultimately,
I don't find it interesting to to use.
I hear you.
You're a bit old school. I must I am I.
Yeah.
I'm trying to think about the future,
and I think
it's still even in the future also going
to be boring. I think there's something
fundamentally boring about it, and I've
been trying to figure it out. So, for
example, I use it a lot for more and
more and more for programming.
So, [snorts] for building stuff.
And there, it's not about the final
output is not the code, the output is
what the code creates.
And there, it's extremely useful. Not It
doesn't matter if it's boring or not.
It's useful. But when the final output
is the thing that AI creates, which
would be in in music, then there's
something about us that just
like we know
we there is something boring about it.
>> Yes. We want to celebrate and see the
thing that's hard to create. And if AI
can just text the song, generate a top
10 hit,
we we will quickly lose value for that,
I think. And so, we'll want raw
like raw. Whatever whatever shape that
raw takes. I want to say raw talent, but
that raw talent of any kind. And per-
perhaps
it would make me a little bit sad, but
that's also awesome. Perhaps
the new kind of raw talent that
civilization is asking for is how to
make
uh great TikToks.
Maybe that's what raw talent looks like.
It makes me a little bit sad, because
I'm a huge fan of long form. Mhm.
Uh but that that also creating TikToks
and
is is also talent. It's a It is a
talent, absolutely. Um when I see
anything that's AI-generated, I
instantly recognize it. Any video, I'm
like, "Ugh, boring, boring, boring." And
my kids do the same thing. They just
have no interest in engaging with it. As
soon as they recognize it, and they can
spot it a mile away,
>> Yeah.
and they're just like, "Boring, boring,
boring, boring, boring." And then they
kind of dis- then they they don't even
want to engage with the social media
platforms, which is which is a danger,
uh which I think they need to crack down
on the AI slop. YouTube's done a pretty
good job on it, but um it's hard to it's
hard to stay on this
it's
get it gets flooded with so much of this
stuff. It's so easy to create and put up
there, and to just be in the
um
in the whack-a-mole thing, where you
just trying to get rid of it all is is
is
>> fundamentally like it's fundamentally
boring. I think boring is a really good
word.
>> Boring. And it's
and it's annoying to have to uh flip
through the AI slop. Yeah. But I think
actually, as a civilization, it's just
inspiring for authenticity, cuz you want
to be real
and being raw, which I you know, one of
the things I like about podcasts is
people just
shooting shit and just being themselves
in in a long form versus overproduced.
Cuz I think AI is making people realize
that AI is good at being overproduced.
Right. So, there'll be more Let's get
that covered. Yeah. Even artists, cuz
you're saying like, yeah, they'll use it
as tools. Part of me thinks like
not really.
Like I think I think I think they'll
quickly this kind of process of
generating a bunch of different options
uh and choosing the one you like the
most, I think is a really frustrating
process for artists.
And it I I think it I think AI will will
definitely be used extremely effectively
as a very uh
fine-grained
tool um in the image domain. It's
editing images, but not like
macro editing, but very specific kind of
editing that photo Photoshop is
increasingly integrated in.
Uh I mentioned to you offline, so the
whole um
iZotope RX
group of software that does a lot of the
denoising, de- all all the de- removing
the wind, all the they they integrate
machine learning extremely effectively
for working with audio in different
kinds of ways. There's a bunch of
different other programs that do that.
Maybe for like B-roll footage
and I same thing on the audio, if you
just need a little audio to create a
feeling of a scene,
yeah, it might be used there in that
kind of way. But truly original stuff
I've saved videos where I'm doing
speaking over music, for example, in an
interview.
Somebody's playing, and and we have two
dialo- two people speaking and laughs,
but it's but there's so much bleed
coming from the person playing that you
can't hear what we're saying, and then
we'll split out the voice for that
section, the two voices, separate them,
and then take the music and separate
that stuff. And so, it's really helpful
for things like that.
And now, once again, quick 30-second
thank you to our sponsors. Check them
out in the description. It really is the
best way to support this podcast. Go to
lexfridman.com/sponsors.
We got Uplift Desk for my favorite
office desks, BetterHelp for mental
health, Element for electrolytes, Finn
for customer service AI agents, Shopify
for selling stuff online, and Perplexity
for curiosity-driven knowledge
exploration. Choose wisely, my friends.
And now, back to my conversation with
Rick Beato.
So,
you have this video breaking down
Sabrina Carpenter's song "Manchild".
And you use that as an example of
building up people's intuition about the
uh music business and how the music
production for these popular songs is
being done these days. Who's doing the
songwriting? How is it being done?
And all that kind of stuff.
I was wondering if you could speak to
that.
In that particular song, Jack Antonoff,
who was one of the writers, Amy Allen,
Sabrina Carpenter, said in some awards
thing that there's an old guy on YouTube
that says that Sabrina had very little
to do with the song. And so, he said in
this clip You being the old guy.
>> Me being the old guy that well, Sabrina
really was the She's amazing and she's
the one that wrote everything in the
song. It's like So, my response was
like, well, why are you guys even
included on the songwriting then?
>> [laughter]
>> So, one of the things you highlight is a
lot of people are are included on the
list of
uh songwriters.
>> Yeah. 10 people, 11 people. I mean, you
know, like why are the song Why is song
of the year have songs that are
interpolation meaning that they have
melodies from other songs and they're
interpolation. They used to call it
stealing.
And then, um you have songs that are use
samples for the whole thing like the
Doja song that's out right now. And I
said, look, she took a Gotye song and
basically took off his melody and she
created her own melody over it. It's
like, well, it's I mean, it saves time
for You don't have to actually create a
track. You just can sing over someone
else's song that was already successful.
>> Yeah, you pointing that out, the song
anxiety, it broke my brain.
>> I mean, it's so absurd. Yeah, this feels
unfair. It feels It's a good song, but
it it was also a good song before and it
was before that, it was also a good
song.
Right, 2011 or a Luis Fonsi in 1967.
Um so,
why is that considered to be in the top
songs of the year? It's like, come on,
you can't find another song that's not
based on that.
This is ridiculous. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
And And Doja has some really good songs
on her record. Yeah, but why are these
the ones that are coming to the top
right now? This is interesting. Hey,
that that that might be just a criticism
of the machinery of the business that
that drives them. It's not necessarily
Like a lot of these folks
are really good musicians.
>> [snorts]
>> First of all, I think a lot of them are
also good like the actual songs that
make it to the top are good. I'm I'm a
big fan of Bruno Mars. He's a great
songwriter.
And he's a great musician all around.
>> Absolutely.
>> You know, it's like a Michael Jackson
and reincarnated.
>> Super super talented guy. Incredible,
right?
>> Yes. Uh you mentioned Billie Eilish and
her brother write a lot of the songs.
>> Yeah. Super talented. I mean, Taylor
Swift is unlike anything I mean, that's
a historic figure in music.
But she's a fundamentally, at least
originally, a singer-songwriter.
>> Yes. So, that's a I mean, that I mean,
I'm sorry, but that that is a like of
the kind of music that Rick Beato
uh gives props to. She's the
she carries
the flame forward. She works on her own
songs, absolutely. And she But she never
has more than two co-writers on things.
You want to take a quick bathroom break?
>> Yeah. Okay.
I have to ask you about this complexity
that you're facing on a basically daily
basis.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> I think uh it's a challenge a lot of
YouTube folks experience, but you're
just so viscerally experiencing it
because a lot of what you do in your
channel is celebrate music broadly. And
so, as part of that process, you have to
sometimes show clips of music. And I
think all of that falls under fair use,
quite obviously. And so, you get all
these YouTube uh copyright claims.
And for folks who don't know, if you get
three three of those, it's
Each one of those can be a strike on the
channel and can take down your channel.
And you you get some insane amount. You
said you got like uh I I think I had a
similar thing
on the Rick Rubin episode. Like 30 I
think you said 13. Yeah. 13. So, what
Can you just speak to this whole thing?
You've been in a constant battle WMG,
UMG,
all the
all All the All the three-letter name
record labels. Right.
>> The the music business people. So, what
what's the story there?
>> Well, this has been going on since the
beginning of my channel and I've made
videos periodically. When I first
started,
it was just instant blocks. So, you
never knew back in I started It'll be 10
years in June. So, when I play music
in a video, YouTubers were not playing
music in videos because they didn't
because the the content ID things and
the takedowns and stuff.
So, I would play music and I'd just see
what happens.
And then, you get a content ID claimer
or
you realize that people were
unquote blockers and I came up with that
term that they would block your video,
take down your video.
And I I realized at first, it was like
anything Guns N' Roses, which is still
the case. Guns N' Roses, AC/DC,
I mean, many bands. Fleetwood Mac, um
Led Zeppelin.
And then,
and then something happened. There
There was that guy in the skateboard on
TikTok that had the Ocean Spray thing
and
and he was listening to "Dreams" by
Fleetwood Mac. And that blew up and
became a number one song again.
And the labels then realized I mean, I'd
made many videos about
about why this is wrong and it should be
fair use and everything. Well, because
of that, the labels like, oh, maybe we
should rethink this. And then, they just
started demonetizing videos. Demonetize
means they get all the money
>> the money. In a 1-hour video, if they if
you use 20 seconds of a clip,
Yeah. they get all the money. Yeah.
Okay?
So, I
hired a lawyer finally after the Rick
Rubin
video.
Cuz I thought it was ridiculous. I go
over to to
to Tuscany. I interview Rick at his
house and
and um
I hired a hired a lawyer to fight this
who I'm going to have on my channel. I
don't want to say who it is, but he's
another YouTuber. Mhm. And uh he had had
approached me a couple years ago and and
it's not cheap to do. Uh you you're
going to do like a public interview with
him? I'm going to do an interview with
him, yes. Awesome.
>> him today about it, actually.
>> That'll be great. So, he said, you
should fight these cuz every single one
of them is fair use. And he went through
my my um
entire catalog. I have 2,100 videos.
And he's fought 4,000
content ID claims and won every single
one of them.
>> Mhm.
4,000.
That's a lot. I mean,
when I do top 20 guitar solos, there's
20 content ID claims, you know?
It's and it's either it can be either
from the sound recording if I use that
or if I just play it,
it can be from the publisher. That's
amazing. Yeah. So, is there
I mean, that's it's still he's still a
lawyer.
Still work.
Does that
Is there a hopeful thing you can say
about the future of Yeah, fight these
content ID claims. If it's fair use, if
you're not just playing the song and
listening to it and cuz a lot of the
stuff that are reaction videos or
whatever that are not where they play
the whole song. I mean, I'm using these
things and I'm talking. A lot of the
times it's in interviews or it's in
I'm breaking down a solo and there's a
Yeah, see that's an obvious one, but
even reaction videos, right? Yeah, even
reaction videos, yes, absolutely. Those
are more borderline. Yeah.
But I don't know. I love those videos.
Absolutely. Like when a person is just
sitting there and listening to it and
they're like, you know, like a like a
voice teacher is listening to a vocal
performance
>> Yeah, but those are breakdowns. Yeah,
those are breakdowns, yeah. I think that
the content ID stuff that was happening
with these major labels, they would hire
third parties
that would go out, use AI, and go and um
anytime they detect anything, they
always go to the biggest channels first
to get the most views. It makes sense
and stuff. And And they would claim
everything that they could and
historically, YouTubers never would
fight back. They were like, oh, this is
easy money. YouTubers never
fight back and
at these things because they're afraid
of their channels taken down.
>> Yep. So, Rick Beato said, hold my beer.
There you go.
>> mean, I mean, it's important.
>> it took me years though, Lex. I didn't
I've been doing this So, I So, I've been
doing it for 1 year now and I'm 9 year
I'm 10 years into my channel. So, it
took me that long. I mean, hopefully it
there's a ripple effect also. It's not
just your situation. Hopefully, you
don't have to
deal with this for much longer. Right.
Um how has Spotify changed music? So,
sometimes you highlight the fact that
they change the nature of music in that
it's um
the scarcity is not there.
But also, a lot of it is like every kind
of music is available and so fast and
it's so easy. It's easy to explore. It's
a commodity. It's like
turning a water faucet. Do you think
there's there's some good to I mean,
there's a lot of good to that, right?
Yeah.
Have you Did you go through that whole
pro I I still remember
where I had to basically throw away the
albums. I never did that.
Well, after you after you uploaded them
into your computer?
Yes, so there's that two-step process.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> One, there's like the hard albums, CDs
for me. Okay.
>> And then and then you upload them into
your computer. Yep. And you save them.
And then you
uh
how do you put it?
Allegedly, a friend of yours pirates
some extra songs.
>> Yep.
And then puts them on the computer. So,
you have but you have your stash on the
computer. You're like, this is my
finally selected stash of greatness.
Uh sometimes organized by album,
sometimes not.
And then the big moment for me that was
really difficult to do, really difficult
to do is throw away that stash.
Be- and switch to Spotify. Mhm. Switch
to streaming. And basically re- build
the stash of playlists and all this kind
of stuff.
And it was heartbreaking cuz so much
love and effort went into that. Both the
CD
the the stashing of the CD and the
stashing of the MP3s in the computer.
And then in Spotify, it just seems just
effortless.
But it helped me discover all kinds of
artists I never would have discovered
otherwise. And Pandora, I use a lot.
Pandora is more um
uh prioritizing on the discovery part
versus organization part. And that was
really wonderful. So, one of the things
I I I'll start with the positive that I
like about Spotify is that they show
view count they show play counts.
Whether they're real or not, that's
another question. But but they show how
many plays songs have. And that's how
the charts are based. Does that give you
signal that something is listened to a
billion times? Does that mean something
to you? Yeah, it means that that it's a
popular song. Well, that's a massive
hit. There's very few songs that have a
billion billion plays.
Now, the downside of Spotify is the way
that they pay their artists. Now,
they've lumped in
podcasts with that that are getting a
cut of this the streaming
with the with the music.
Um
and
you know, the search and discovery. I
mean, there's there's a there's benefits
of algorithms and there's negative
things of algorithms. Al- algorithms
happen to kind of a lot of many times
pigeonhole people
into
listening to the same genre of music all
the time and not expanding
their
you know, um
the discovery of of new music where that
you might hear on the radio back in the
day where program directors
would play things that they liked,
right? And you might hear something Ooh,
what is that? Oh, that's a new
Soundgarden record or something you
know, like whoa, I like that. I'm going
to go buy check that out. You know,
something you might not have heard or
something odd.
Like one one thing I really love doing
on uh Spotify is you can you can have
radio. Yep. Meaning like you have a few
It's similar to Pandora. Like you can
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> Okay.
This is going to reveal a little too
much about myself, but usually when I go
work out
I'll listen to something like Rage
Against the Machine radio.
>> [laughter]
>> I'm sorry. I need
>> What else would you listen to? I I need
motivation. Classical music, I don't
know. Um but yeah, it's pretty good cuz
it recommends a bunch of other stuff I
wouldn't even know. Some of it I know,
obviously. But akin to the similar to
the Rage Against the Machiney type
thing, it recommends a bunch of artists
and it's like, oh holy shit, that's
awesome.
So, I don't know. That that discovery
works really well. So, this is some of
it is a technology thing. Um
but that experience is fundamentally
more
vibrant than I had previously with my
stash.
That I would just keep a stash and I
would listen to the same record over and
over and over and over.
But yeah, this what's lost is the the
I'm sure you love you love this, but
listening through the Led Zeppelin
records just driving in a car and
listening to the whole thing all the way
through. Yeah, that's lost. So, I have
my old iTunes libraries from 2005 that I
listened that I
that I've saved the CDs that I uploaded
into my computer. Yeah.
Anytime I do the I play songs
on my um
when I'm doing an interview, I always
play wave files. I put them in. And it's
funny that when I interview a mixer, I'm
interviewed this mixing engineer Andy
Wallace.
And people comment,
wow, that the song sounded amazing here.
Well, not only are they great mixes that
he did, but I'm using wave files in
there. And people notice that and these
are wave files from
from, you know, original encoding, not
not remastered things that Spotify keeps
doing and adding a bunch of more top end
and things like that. That these are the
These are actually the
the original wave files from off the CD
that I ripped
20 years ago.
What's your current I mean, people are
really curious about that. So, what's
your current stack? What are the tools
you use? What's your DAW? What's the
audio interface? What are the mics? So,
I use Pro Tools for the most part, but I
also use Logic
Mhm. Uh and Ableton. I've got all I've
got all those. So, you're mostly on a
Mac? I'm only on a Mac. Only on a Mac?
Only on a Mac? I'm only the opposite.
>> Although we have multiple PCs cuz my
kids use PCs. Yeah, just to rebel. They
do it for gaming. They like to game.
>> Right, that's true. I but like in terms
of editing,
I hate how how good Mac is. So good.
>> It's just integrating the hardware and
the software just work well together.
Both on the video.
>> a Mac, honestly, I wouldn't be talking
to you right now. Because I got a G3
that So, the only good thing that a
major label did for me is when when my
band was on
UMG and they bought a
they bought me a G3 and a and an SM7
and Pro Tools Digio One, the first
prosumer Pro Tools thing. And I learned
how to use Pro Tools and that allowed me
to learn how to edit video and become a
record producer.
So, I got to give it give it to Macs for
that.
So, Pro Tools, I mean, that's still the
the standard. That's kind of the
industry standard, yeah. I got to ask
you cuz I know I've never used Pro
Tools. I've used
again, I'm a caveman.
I've used uh Reaper, I've used Studio
One. That's recently I've used that. And
for the most time I've used Ableton
Live.
I feel like I'm using 1% of the power of
the tool. Mhm.
Like Ableton Live makes me feel like I'm
literally just pressing the record
button.
Ableton's amazing. It really is.
>> It is. Yeah.
>> But I feel like that I mean, it's
designed for people that are
doing like all kinds of MIDI stuff and
like
looping and
the the the the What is it? The push
buttons with the with the beats and the
Is this I mean, I sound I sound really
out of touch. But there it's just the
power is incredible. Also, it's I think
it's
not just for recording, it's also for
live performances. Yes. So, this is why
Studio One has been a little bit nicer
for me because it's simpler made for uh
recording more so.
Any DAW that you get used to, like
that's Just use anything.
>> Using it, yeah. And and You have to
become a master at the things if you
want to be a recording engineer or
producer, you you become an expert. A
lot of the you know, Phineas and Billie
Eilish, I think that they use Logic.
That's their DAW that they like to use.
And Logic, you know, a lot of pros use
Logic. You know, I I fire up Logic every
couple days and I use it for things.
I have I have it on my laptop here and I
I Pro Tools and Logic on my laptop. I
use both. I use Pro Tools mostly,
though. But Pro Tools that's where you
feel like at home. I'm an I'm an expert
in Pro Tools. Are you using any
uh emulation, any amp sims, or it's all
real amps? No, I use amp sims. On my
laptop here, when I travel and things
like that, I use Neural DSP, which I
just did a video at their headquarters
in Helsinki. Mhm.
And their um
the CEO Doug Castro is a is a friend of
mine. I actually talked to him today, as
a matter of fact.
And I have a Kemper
amp sim, you know, a modeler. I have an
Axe-Fx.
I've got a Helix. I pretty much have all
these things.
But for me, I can I have 100 amps in my
studio. So, and I have mics set up all
the time on cabinets and stuff. I have
100 amplifiers, real amplifiers. Real?
Yeah. Wait, sorry. 100?
>> 100, yeah. About 100, maybe 95.
How do
How does one go
get to that level? Collecting and being
I'll be 64 in uh
in April, so. So, you just don't let go.
I don't let go, no. Why would you get to
100? Like is it is it tone difference?
>> Yes. So, everything it does one thing
really well. Uh-huh. And so, it'd be
like
Okay, so I have this Marshall JCM800
that's modded that that does this one
thing. It's got great mids and it's good
for this kind of a tune. So, I will pull
that out. Then it's like, no, I need
more of like a scooped metal tune sound
that's more like Metallica or Dream
Theater or something. So, oh, I'm going
to pull out my my Mesa Mesa Boogie. Or I
need a I need something that's chimy
that's more like Brian May or like The
Edge. I'm going to pull out my Vox AC30.
So, everything and and
that's that's why I have so many amps
because they all do Every amp I have
does one thing really well. If it
doesn't do well do it well, I get rid of
it.
And I've And I'm down to 100.
>> Down to 100. It's only 100.
>> Yeah. Uh but
>> get by with probably 75.
Come on. But you then you're really
running the risk of not having just the
right amp.
But you're using emulation, so it's
That's That's great. I mean, I'm not
There's the other side of it, which is
the guitar.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> I told you offline, I think having
multiple guitars is cheating, but
whatever. No Nobody agrees with me on
this. I only have like one I I do have
some side
pieces. Um but one main The greatest
What do you play?
>> Strat, yeah. American Strat. I said I
would never do this, but I was in a
guitar store I live next to a guitar
store
in Cambridge.
And one day I would always stop by, I
don't know why. I just just look at the
guitars like I don't really know why
exactly, just being the aura great
instruments.
And I
they they brought in this American Strat
that had these different shades of It
was like a silver.
And I just I've never had this feeling.
They talk about love at first sight. I
just fell in love with the guitar.
Can you just speak to the kind of
guitars you have and you love? I pretty
much have
mainly
um
old-school guitars, right? So, I have
Gibsons.
I have Fenders. I have PRS guitars.
And then I have
I have two Gibson acoustics. I have a
country and western that I've had for
probably 30 some odd years. It's a great
guitar. And I have a J-45 Gibson.
And I have a Martin D-28. So, I only
have three nice acoustics. And I have a
Guild 12-string. And I have a Guild um
Nashville-tuned guitars. The low strings
are up up the octave. So, the E, A, and
D, and G are up the octave. That's
Nashville tuning. Six-string though.
Like basically what David Gilmour plays
on Comfortably Numb in my video. He
plays a Nashville-tuned, but with one
variation. The low E is up two octaves.
So, um he
he demonstrates actually the And this
how he wrote Comfortably Numb. The the
chorus part of it was with this
particular guitar that he's playing in
the video.
What can you say about like the
different uh feels that the guitars the
acoustics have?
Like what How do you know which one to
pull pull out? It depends on the kind of
part that I'm playing. If I want
something with really tight mid-range
with not that doesn't have a lot of low
low bass.
This particular old Gibson that I have,
the '57, I will pull that out. It's got
very balanced
strings and uh you know, mid-range. It
doesn't have a lot It doesn't have a
booming bottom end, booming low E string
or anything or A string.
So, it depends on what
what kind of sound I'm looking for. If
I'm
>> about sound versus feel? Yeah. All my
guitars play equally well. I have them
all set up to where they play well.
Um
I have a signature Gibson guitar that
I've had for
5 years now. When you say Gibson, Gibson
Les Paul? Gibson It's a double-cut Les
Paul Special, yeah. With P-90 pickups. I
don't know what double-cut means, but it
sounds impressive.
>> cut cut two um Oh. Yeah, as opposed to
Les Paul that has one cut. So, it's a
Les Paul Special with that has two. I
have it over there.
My signature guitar, yeah.
>> the All right, nice. When you play this,
you're going to be like, "Oh my god,
this is butter."
>> Now I'm I Again, I said it's cheating. I
don't
>> And what amp do you play through?
Do you play through an amp sim or do you
have What do you have? Like a
>> This is going to be embarr- Yeah, yeah.
I use Bias FX. I'm sorry.
Lex, I I use amp sims, too, so. I just
got the new John Mayer Neural DSP plugin
today that I have not tried out. He did
a modeling of all his amplifiers that
they that Neural DSP did. And um it
sounds great. John played it, it sounds
just like his amps. Yeah, John is
incredible.
>> John's great.
>> I've been fortunate enough to have
dinner with him two times.
And uh aside from being an incredible
musician, he's also conversationally
just
>> Yes. I've known John since he was he He
lived in Atlanta, but when he got
signed. And I knew John from way back
then, probably in the early 2000s.
I think he doesn't get enough credit.
Like he's one of the greatest living
guitarists. He's a fantastic guitar
player.
>> Absolutely. And a celebrator,
if that's a word, of great guitar
players.
>> Absolutely.
By way of advice,
you started
uh your YouTube channel in your mid-50s
and found incredible success.
You You've had essentially multiple
careers. Um is there some wisdom you can
extract from that?
So, my my theory is that
somebody's got to be successful, so why
can't it be you? That was That was
>> [laughter]
>> That's That was my When I started my
channel, I mean, I didn't start it to It
started by accident with the Dylan
video. And um And it really so many
people reached out to me. I started it 6
months after that viral video.
So many people wrote to me, "Can you
teach me this?" Pro musicians,
well-known ones that you would who you'd
know. "Can you teach me this?"
I can't teach you what Dylan did, but I
can
I can teach you relative pitch, develop
your ear that way.
But then that I had conservatories
writing to me about this stuff from all
over the world. "How did you teach Dylan
this?" Cuz we made it about four
different videos, and they got more and
more sophisticated.
And um
so I thought, "Okay, I'll make some
YouTube videos and explain this stuff."
This is really why I started, so I
didn't have to keep I couldn't answer
the emails. There were so many of them.
So, I just started making videos on how
to train your ear and music theory. And
that's really how I started my channel.
And and my wife was like, "What are you
doing?" I said, "I'm making YouTube
videos."
"Why?"
So, I don't have to keep telling people
how I did this stuff. And then all of a
sudden,
you know, few I had 4,000 subscribers
the first month, another 4,000, then hit
100,000 after a year, and then 6 months
later 200,000, then 3 months later
300,000. And
so
I think that one thing that should be
said
that in modern culture for young people,
a lot of them will see YouTube and
TikTok and Instagram,
and they kind of want to be famous.
They want to get the clicks and the
views and so on. And that's the thing
they chase and they optimize.
I think the thing that you're leaving
unstated, perhaps,
is that you spent many years
pursuing the mastery of a craft.
And there's a lot of value
to getting good at something.
Absolutely. Offline,
you can actually reveal your journey
online, but the thing you're chasing is
not
uh
fame. It's getting good at something.
And I think actually what happens is
even if the thing you get good at
is not the thing that you become famous
for, if that's the thing you're
that ends up happening,
it's still like getting good at one
thing kind of somehow relates to getting
good at another thing. Somehow that'll
lead you to get better at getting better
at the next thing and the next thing and
the next thing. But if you're just
chasing fame and trying to figure out
how do I do the viral thing or so on, it
just seems to You might actually get
there, but it'll be unfulfilling and not
long-lasting.
My theory of my channel has always been
make videos on things I'm interested in
and
at first I thought, "Oh, nobody's going
to watch an old white-haired guy on
YouTube." Yeah. That was kind of my
thing.
Well, that was not correct.
Um
and
then it's like, "We'll just make videos
on stuff I'm interested in." It just so
happens that other people are interested
in the same things I'm interested in.
And keep learning. And I When I produce
bands, I never let them take my picture
ever. And I never let them record me in
the studio. There's virtually no
pictures of any band I ever produced.
So, from 1999 to 20
15 when I December 2015 when that Dylan
video came out,
no one took my picture. There were no
pictures of me on the internet.
>> You're fully behind the camera kind of
guy, meaning like
>> No. No. No pictures. No
No pictures with people. "Hey, can we
take a picture?" I said, "No, no
pictures with people." And now you're
like you're the talent. You're the face.
>> [laughter]
>> No, I mean, but the Again, the thing
you're leaving unstated there is is like
you spent a lot of years you're teaching
music. Like really exploring music,
trying a music career of like trying to
create, trying to produce, trying to be
a musician, all these
not just trying,
like being getting extremely good at it.
I just I think in modern culture,
there's a sense you want to skip that
part. I want to be famous. I want you
know, this
and that is a thing that's not going to
be in most cases effective uh as a
primary thing to chase.
So,
I
have an undergrad in classical bass. I
have a master's from New England
Conservatory in jazz guitar. Then I
taught college for I taught jazz studies
for 5 years from '87 to '92.
Then I got a publishing deal, my my
publishing deal in 1992 with Polygram
publishing. And then I became a producer
when I was 37 not having no idea how to
engineer. I taught myself engineering.
And then YouTube.
I taught myself how to edit videos. And
then you taught yourself how to
interview. And I taught myself to
interview. I've never done an interview
before. I never was like an interviewer,
what? You haven't just done that. You've
taught yourself
not how to do you just YouTube but
YouTube shorts. Yes. Different Totally
different thing. Totally different
skill.
And then not just YouTube but like
how to be like a There's a cuz
you're both a YouTuber
and and like a musician who posts stuff
on YouTube. YouTuber means like you're
thinking about stuff like thumbnails and
>> Which I make my own thumbnails.
I've always made my own thumbnails. By
the way, before I forget, I think I I
speak for the entirety of the internet
thanking you for how you introduce your
videos and how you close them.
Cuz you This is a big part of YouTube
where people have a 30-minute
introduction to to a 5-minute video. You
just go straight in.
>> [laughter]
>> That's really wonderful. That's I mean
and on all fronts. I mean I suppose that
has to do with the production skills
that you have of understanding cutting
cutting the fat.
>> Yep. Yeah, cutting cutting the fluff
cutting the bullshit. I'll just get
straight to the core of the thing.
I've heard you talk about maintaining
friendships for a long time.
You said never waste a friendship. Can
you elaborate on that? Yeah. That's one
of my things is that I really value the
time I've spent with people,
friendships, and keeping in touch with
people.
I
talk to each one of my siblings multiple
times a week.
I talk to my sisters probably every
night, my two sisters.
Um
I I have friends from college. I got
friends from growing up. I have friends
from, you know,
both colleges I went to. I have friends
from all different eras in my life
that I keep in touch with and visit
whenever I can and
And you must have met some incredible
humans and incredibly weird and
interesting humans throughout your life.
Mhm. [snorts]
So it's worth it the effort to
to connect and reconnect. I mean, it's
pretty much everything in life. Not
nothing means anything more than the
friendships that you make and your and
your family. Yeah, what's the point of
this whole thing? Aren't you right?
What's the role of music in
in the human experience? Well, hopefully
to enlighten people and to create the
soundtrack of their life.
It is, right?
>> Yeah.
Music music does something.
I'll I'll get
sometimes when I'm alone I'll listen
listen to a song
and there's nothing quite like a song
that makes me truly feel like feel alive
in whatever that is, sadness or hope or
excitement
or
um
when I'm working out listening to Rage
Against the Machine like protest
or as I was listening to the Metallica
the I was really listening to the set
that they played in in Moscow
just hyped
like truly hyped. I was like pacing
listening to it.
And there's nothing like that.
I've never found anything.
And I don't know what that is in the
human psyche that's that
but I'm so glad we found it. We humans
created instruments
that can vibrate strings and together
create harmonies and melodies and
and ones that reverberate through
generations and they carry that.
It's one of the greatest things that
humans ever did
creating music. And all of that led up
to you, some guy
being listened to by millions of people
on the internet.
>> [laughter]
>> This is all a simulation, Rick. And I've
been a fan of yours for a long time.
Like I told you, this is crazy to meet
you.
Same, Lex. Thank you for everything you
do for the world, for celebrating music
for helping us discover and rediscover
some of the incredible musicians
and songs that have been created over
the over the decade over the centuries.
Um thank you for being who you are and
thank you for talking today. Thanks. I
appreciate it.
Thanks for listening to this
conversation with Rick Beato. To support
this podcast, please check out our
sponsors in the description where you
can also find links to contact me, ask
questions, give feedback, and so on.
And now let me leave you with some words
from Friedrich Nietzsche as I often do.
Without music life would be a mistake.
Thank you for listening and hope to see
you
next time.